1. Apples

Apples contain fiber, vitamin C, and numerous antioxidants. They are very filling and make the perfect snack if you’re hungry between meals.
2. Avocados

Avocados are different from most other fruits because they contain lots of healthy fat. They are not only creamy and tasty but also high in fiber, potassium, and vitamin C. Swap mayonnaise for avocado as a salad dressing, or spread it on toast for breakfast.
3. Bananas

Bananas are a good source of potassium. They’re also high in vitamin B6 and fiber and are convenient and portable.
4. Blueberries

Blueberries are both delicious and high in antioxidants.
5. Oranges

Oranges are well known for their vitamin C content. What’s more, they’re high in fiber and antioxidants.
6. Strawberries

Strawberries are highly nutritious and low in both carbs and calories.

They provide vitamin C, fiber, and manganese and make a delicious dessert.
Other healthy fruits

Other healthy fruits and berries include cherries, grapes, grapefruit, kiwi, lemons, mangoes, melons, olives, peaches, pears, pineapples, plums, and raspberries.
Anna Williams/Offset
7. Eggs

Eggs are highly nutritious.

Once demonized for being high in cholesterol, expertsTrusted Source now see them as a useful source of protein that may have various benefits.
8–10: Meats

Lean, unprocessed meats can be included in a healthy diet.
8. Lean beef

Lean beef is an excellent source of protein if you consume it in moderation. It also provides highly bioavailable iron.
9. Chicken breasts

Chicken breast is low in fat and calories but high in protein. It’s a great source of many nutrients.
10. Lamb and mutton

Sheep are usually grass-fed, and their meat tends to be high inTrusted Source omega-3 fatty acids compared with omega-6.
11–15: Nuts and seeds

Despite being high in unsaturated fat and calories, nuts and seeds may help lower the riskTrusted Source of cardiovascular disease, cancer, and other health issues. They are a satisfying snack could help those managing their weight.

They also require almost no preparation, so they’re easy to add to your routine. They can also add texture to salads and other dishes.

However, they are not suitable for people with a nut allergy.
11. Almonds

Almonds are a popular nut that contain with vitamin E, antioxidants, magnesium, and fiber. A 2021 reviewTrusted Source found that almonds may contribute to weight loss, support the gut microbiota, improve thinking, manage heart rate when a person is under stress, and prevent skin aging.
12. Chia seeds

Chia seeds are a nutrient-dense addition to the diet. A single ounce (28 grams) provides 11 grams of fiber and significant amounts of magnesium, manganese, calcium, and various other nutrients.
13. Coconuts

Coconuts provide fiber and fatty acids called medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs).
14. Macadamia nuts

Macadamia nuts are tasty and higher in monounsaturated fats and lower in omega-6 fatty acids than most other nuts.
15. Walnuts

Walnuts are highly nutritious and rich in fiber and various vitamins and minerals. Pair them with feta cheese to dress a salad.
16. Brazil nuts

Brazil nuts are nutrient-rich and have a smooth, buttery texture. The nutrients they contain support thyroid function, and they are a good source of the mineral selenium.
17–26: Vegetables

Calorie for calorie, vegetables are among the most concentrated sources of nutrients. Including a variety of vegetables in your diet will ensure you get a wide range of nutrients.
17. Asparagus

Asparagus is a popular vegetable that is low in both carbs and calories and rich in vitamin K.
18. Bell peppers

Bell peppers come in several colors, including red, yellow, and green. They’re crunchy and sweet and are a great source of antioxidants and vitamin C.
19. Broccoli

Broccoli is a cruciferous vegetable that tastes great both raw and cooked. It’s an excellent source of fiber and vitamins C and K and contains a decent amount of protein compared with other vegetables.
20. Carrots

Carrots are a popular root vegetable. They’re sweet, crunchy, and loaded with nutrients such as fiber and vitamin K. They’re also high in carotene antioxidants, which have numerous benefits.

Put a few carrots stick in your lunch box or use them for eating guacamole and other dips.
21. Cauliflower

Cauliflower is a very versatile cruciferous vegetable. You can add it to curries, roast it with olive oil, or use it raw in salads or for dipping.
22. Cucumber

Cucumbers make a refreshing snack. They are low in both carbs and calories, consisting mostly of water. They also contain small amounts of vitamin K and other nutrients.
23. Garlic

Garlic is a healthy and tasty addition to salads and cooked savory dishes. It containsTrusted Source allicin, which has antioxidant and antimicrobial effects. Its nutrients may also reduce the risk of cancer and cardiovascular disease.
24. Kale

Kale is high in fiber, vitamins C and K, and other nutrients. It adds a satisfying crunch to salads and other dishes. You can also add it to stir fries or bake in the oven to make crunchy kale chips.
25. Onions

Onions have a strong flavor and feature in many recipes. They contain a number of bioactive compounds believed to have health benefits.
26. Tomatoes

Tomatoes are usually categorized as a vegetable, although they are technically a fruit. They are tasty and provide nutrients such as potassium and vitamin C. For a bit of fun and extra flavor, try growing tomatoes on your windowsill.
More healthy vegetables

Other vegetables worth mentioning are artichokes, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, celery, eggplant, leeks, lettuce, mushrooms, radishes, squash, Swiss chard, collard greens, turnips, and zucchini.
27–32: Fish and seafood

Fish and other seafood can be healthy and nutritious. They’re rich in omega-3 fatty acids and iodine.

Research suggestsTrusted Source that eating oily fish can boost a person’s heart and brain health.
27. Salmon

Salmon is a type of oily fish that is tasty and high in nutrients, including protein and omega-3 fatty acids. It also contains some vitamin D.
28. Sardines

Sardines are small, oily, and highly nutritious fish. They provide many nutrients, including calcium and vitamin D.
29. Shellfish

Shellfish are nutrient dense and make a tasty light meal. Edible shellfish include clams, mollusks, and oysters. Be sure to get them from a reputable source to ensure they are fresh and toxin-free.
30. Shrimp

Shrimp is a type of crustacean related to crabs and lobsters. It tends to be low in fat and calories but high in protein. It also provides selenium and vitamin B12.
31. Trout

Trout is another type of delicious freshwater fish, similar to salmon.
32. Tuna

Tuna tends to be low in fat and calories and high in protein. It’s perfect for people who need to add more protein to their diets but keep calories low.

Be sure to buy low mercury varieties that are responsibly sourced.
33–35: Grains

Whole grains play an important role in your diet because they are healthy carbs and provide a variety of micronutrients, fiber and, fuel for your body.

They may also help with weight management.
33. Brown rice

Rice is a staple food for much of the world’s population. Brown rice is more nutritious than white rice, with decent amounts of fiber, vitamin B1, and magnesium.
34. Oats

Oats provide nutrients and powerful fibers called beta glucans. Glucans provide numerous benefits, including helping lower cholesterol and feed beneficial bacteria in the gut.
35. Quinoa

Quinoa is a tasty grain that’s high in nutrients such as fiber and magnesium. It is also an excellent source of plant-based protein.
36–37: Breads

Whole grain breads can be high in fiber and other nutrients, and are a better choice than highly processed white bread.

When buying bread, compare product labels and look for those with the most dietary fiber and the least added sugar.

If you make your own bread, you’ll know exactly what goes into it. A bread making machine can help if you’re not sure about baking.
36. Ezekiel bread

Ezekiel bread is made from organic sprouted whole grains and legumes.
37. Homemade low-carb and gluten-free breads

If you’re looking for low-carb or gluten-free breads, you might want to consider making your own. Here’s a list of 15 recipes for gluten-free, low carb breads.
38–41: Legumes

Legumes are a great plant-based source of protein, iron, and fiber.

Legumes can sometimes interfere with digestion and nutrient absorption, but soaking and properly preparing them can reduce this risk.
38. Green beans

Green beans, also called string beans, are an unripe variety of the common bean. Use them whole as a side dish or add them cold to salads.
39. Kidney beans

Kidney beans contain fiber and various vitamins and minerals. Make sure to cook them properly, because they’re toxic when raw.
40. Lentils

Lentils are another popular legume. They’re high in fiber and a good source of plant-based protein.
41. Peanuts

Peanuts are, in fact, legumes, not true nuts. They are tasty and high in nutrients and antioxidants. One studyTrusted Source has concluded that peanuts can aid in weight loss and may help manage blood pressure.

However, if you’re monitoring your calorie intake, you may want to be mindful of your consumption of peanut butter, which is very high in calories and easy to eat in large amounts.
42–44: Dairy

For those who can tolerate them, dairy products are a healthy source of various important nutrients.
42. Cheese

A single slice of cheese may offer about the same amount of nutrients as an entire cup (240 ml) of milk. It’s also a tasty addition to many dishes and can replace meat as a protein food. However, it can be high in fat.

There are many types of cheese, with different flavors and textures. Opt for less processed varieties of cheese.
43. Dairy milk

Dairy milk contains vitamins, minerals, protein, and calcium.

A 2022 reviewTrusted Source concluded that people who consume dairy products are less likely to die from cardiovascular disease (CVD) than those who don’t. However, full-fat dairy may increase the risk of CVD and some cancers.
44. Yogurt

Yogurt is made from milk that is fermented through the addition of live bacteria. It has many of the same health effects as milk, but yogurt with live cultures has the added benefit of friendly probiotic bacteria.
45–46: Fats and oils

Dietary patterns that include unsaturated fats and oils are considered very healthy.
45. Extra-virgin olive oil

Extra-virgin olive oil is one of the healthiest vegetable oils. It contains heart-healthy monounsaturated fats and is high in antioxidants that have powerful health benefits.
46. Coconut oil

Coconut oil is a saturated fat, but it contains MCTs and may have similar health effects to olive oil.

However, coconut oil has been shown to increase LDLTrusted Source (bad) cholesterol to a greater degree than other plant-based liquid oils, so it’s best to use it in moderation.
47–48: Tubers

Tubers are the storage organs of some plants. As foods, they are called root vegetables.
47. Potatoes

Potatoes provide potassium and contain a little of almost every nutrient you need, including vitamin C. With their jackets, they are also a good source of fiber.

Potatoes contain moreTrusted Source water and are less energy-dense than pasta and rice, and can leave you feeling full, so that you don’t need to eat more. As a result, they may help with weight loss.
48. Sweet potatoes

Sweet potatoes are rich in antioxidants, beta carotene, vitamin A, and other essential nutrients. Eat them baked, mashed, or added to other dishes.
49. Apple cider vinegar

Apple cider vinegar may help regulate postmeal blood sugar levels when consumed with a meal, though more evidence is needed on its effectiveness.

It’s great to use as a salad dressing or to add flavor to meals.
50. Dark chocolate

Dark chocolate contains antioxidants known as flavonoids that may help manageTrusted Source cholesterol and reduce the risk of heart disease. However, the amount of chocolate that is usually healthy to eat is not enough to provide significant benefits.

The American Heart AssociationTrusted Source
recommends eating chocolate but in moderation and for enjoyment rather than its health benefits. 