Acharya Acarya
One who teaches by example. Usually refers to a
prominent or exemplary spiritual teacher.
Advaita Adwaita
Non-dual. Refers to the impersonalistic philosophy
which unqualifyingly equates God, the soul and
matter.
Ahimsa Ahinsa
Not killing. Non-violence; respect for life.
Artha Economic development. The second aim of life.
Arti Arati Welcoming ceremony in which auspicious articles
such as incense and lamps are offered to the deity
or to saintly people.
Aryan
Noble. Refers to those who know the spiritual
values of life. Scholars say it refers to the original
inhabitants of the Sindhu region in India.
Ashram Asram A place set up for spiritual development.
Ashrama Asrama A stage of life (of which there are four) adopted
according to material considerations, but ultimately
as a means to spiritual realisation.
Atharva Veda The fourth of the Vedas.
Atman Atma
Self. Can refer to body, mind or soul, depending
on context. Ultimately, it refers to the real self, the
soul.
Aum Om The sacred symbol and sound representing the
ultimate; the most sacred of Hindu words.
Avatar Avatara
Avtara
One who descends. Refers to the descent of a
deity, most commonly Vishnu. Sometimes it is
translated as
incarnation which, although
inaccurate, may be the best English word
available.
Ayodhya Birthplace of Rama.
Bhagavad Gita
The Song of the Lord. Spoken by Krishna, this is
the most important scripture for most Hindus.
Tradition dates it back to 3,000 years BCE, though
most scholars attribute it to the first millennium
BCE. Considered an Upanishad.
Bhajan Bhajana Devotional hymn or song.
Bhakti
Devotion; love. Devotional form of Hinduism.
Bhakti-yoga The path of loving devotion, aimed at developing
pure love of God.
Brahma A Hindu deity, considered one of the Trimurti, and
in charge of creative power; not to be confused
with Brahman or Brahmin.

Brahmachari Brahmacari
Brahmacharin
Brahmcarin
One in the first stage of life, a celibate student of
Vedic knowledge.
Brahmacharya Brahmacarya
Brahma ch(c)ari
Brahma ch(c)arin
The first ashrama or stage of life.
Brahman The ultimate reality, or the all-pervading reality;
that from which everything emanates, in which it
rests and into which it is ultimately dissolved.
Brahmin Brahman
Brahmana
The first of the four varnas, the principal social
groupings from which priests are drawn. Some
writers, rather confusingly, use the spelling
‘brahman’, and the meaning only becomes clear
in the context of a few sentences (see also
Brahman and Brahma).
Darshan Shastras Six systems of Hindu philosophy- Nyaya,
Vaisheshika, Sankhya, Yoga, Vedanta and
Meemansa.
Dassehra Dussehra, Dassera,
Dashara
(Other variants are
also found)
Ten days. Also called Vijay Dashami. Celebrates
the victory of Rama on the tenth day of the bright
half of the lunar month of Jyeshtha. As is often the
case with Hindu festivals, followers may interpret
the festival differently, eg in connection with Durga
(see Navaratri).
Dharma
Religion or
religious duty is the usual translation
into English, but literally it means
the intrinsic
quality of the self or
that which sustains one’
s
existence.
Dhoti A garment made of natural fibre (usually cotton or
silk), worn by males, which covers the lower body
and legs.
Dhyana Meditation.
Divali Diwali, Dipavali,
Deepavali
Festival of lights at the end of one year and
beginning of the new year, according to one Hindu
calendar.
Durga Female deity. A form of the goddess Parvati; wife
of Shiva.
Dvaita Dwaita
Dual. Refers to the personalistic philosophy that
differentiates between God, the soul and matter.
Dwarka Dvarka Dvaraka
Dwaraka
Pilgrimage site on the west coast of India.
Ganesha Ganesh Ganupati
Ganapati
A Hindu deity portrayed with an elephant’s head -
a sign of strength. The deity who removes
obstacles.
Ganga
The Ganges. Most famous of all sacred rivers of
India.
Gangotri Source of the river Ganges.
Gotra Exogamous group within Jati

Grihastha Gristhi Grhastha The second stage of Hindu life; one who belongs
to that stage, ie, the householder (grihasti).
Guna
Rope; quality. Specifically refers to the three
qualities of sattva (goodness), rajas (passion) and
tamas (ignorance), which permeate and control
matter.
Guru Spiritual teacher, preceptor or enlightener.
Hanuman The monkey warrior who faithfully served Rama
and Sita. Also called Pavansuta
(son of the wind
God).
Havan Also known as Agnihotra. The basis of many
Hindu rituals used at weddings and on other
ceremonial occasions; the ceremony or act of
worship in which offerings of ghee and grains are
made into fire.
Havan kund The container, usually square or pyramid-shaped,
in which the havan fire is burned.
Hitopadesh Stories with a moral.
Holi The festival of colours, celebrated in Spring.
Homa Term often used interchangeably with havan.
The International
Society for Krishna
Consciousness
(ISKCON)
A religious group of the Vaishnava tradition.
Janeu Jenoi Sacred thread worn by Hindus who study under a
guru.
Janmashtami Janmashtmi The birthday of Krishna, celebrated on the eighth
day of the waning moon in the month of Badra.
Japa Jap The quiet or silent repetition of a mantra as a
meditative process.
Jati
Caste is the usual translation, meaning
occupational kinship group.
Jnana Gyan
Knowledge.
Jnana-yoga Gyan-yoga The path of knowledge, that aims at liberation.
Kali Kaali Name given to that power of God which delivers
justice - often represented by the Goddess Kali (a
form of Durga).
Kali yuga The fourth of the ages; the iron age or the age of
quarrelling and hypocrisy.
Kama The third of the four aims of life - regulated sense
of enjoyment.
Karma
Action. Used of work to refer to the law of cause
and effect.
Karma-yoga The path of self-realisation through dedicating the
fruits of one’s work to God.
Kirtan Songs of praise; corporate devotional singing,
usually accompanied by musical instruments.

Krishna Usually considered an avatar of Vishnu. One of
the most popular of all Hindu deities in
contemporary Britain. His teachings are found in
the Bhagavad Gita.
Kshatriya Khatri Second of the four varnas of traditional Hindu
society, the ruling or warrior class.
Lakshmi Laksmi The goddess of fortune.
Mahabharata The Hindu epic that relates the story of the five
Pandava princes. It includes the Bhagavad Gita
Mala Maala Circle of stringed beads of wood or wool used in
meditation.
Mandala Mandal A circle, area or community/group.
Mandir
Temple.
Mantra That which delivers the mind. Refers to a short
sacred text or prayer, often recited repetitiously.
Manusmriti The laws of Manu. An ancient and important text
on Dharma, including personal and social laws.
Marg
Path (see Jnana yoga, Karma yoga and Bhakti
yoga).
Mata
Mother. Often associated with Hindu goddesses
who represent shakti (power).
Mathura Holy place connected with Krishna
Maya
Not this. Usually, it refers to illusion, particularly
where the permanent soul identifies itself with
temporary matter, eg the body, etc. It can also
mean
power.
Moksha Moksa Ultimate liberation from the process of
transmigration, the continuous cycle of birth and
death.
Mundan The head-shaving ceremony. Performed in the
first or third year of life.
Murti Moorti
Form. The image or deity used as a focus of
worship. ‘Idol’ should definitely not be used, and
‘statue’ may also cause offence.
Navaratri Navaratra The Nine Nights Festival preceding Dassehra, and
held in honour of the goddess Durga
Nirvana The cessation of material existence.
Panchatantra Part of the supplementary Vedic scriptures,
composed of animal stories with a moral.
Parvati The consort of Shiva, also known by other names
such as Durga, Devi, etc.
Prahlada Prahalada A great devotee of Vishnu, connected with the
festival of Holi. Regulation of breath as a means of
controlling the mind.
Pranayam Pranayama Regulation of breadth as a means of controlling
the mind.

Prashad Prasad Prasada
Prashada
Sacred or sanctified food.
Pravachan A lecture or talk, usually based on the scriptures.
Puja Pooja
Worship. General term referring to a variety of
practices in the home or Mandir.
Purana
Ancient. Part of the Smriti scriptures. Contains
many of the well-known stories of Hinduism.
Raja Yoga Raj Yoga Path of self-control and meditation to realise God.
Rajas Passion or creative potency, one of the three
gunas (qualities of material nature).
Rakhi Raakhi A bracelet, usually made out of silk or cotton, tied
to give protection and to strengthen the bond of
mutual love.
Raksha Bandhan The festival when women tie a decorative bracelet
on their brothers’ wrists.
Rama The incarnation of the Lord, and hero of the
Ramayana (avoid using the variant ‘Ram’ for
obvious reasons).
Ramayana Ramayan The Hindu epic that relates the story of Rama and
Sita, composed by the sage Valmiki thousands of
years ago.
Ramnavami Ramnavmi The birthday festival of Rama.
Rig Veda Rg or Rc Veda The first scripture of Hinduism, containing spiritual
and scientific knowledge.
Rishi Rsi, risi A spiritually wise person. More specifically, one of
the seven seers who received the divine wisdom.
Sadhana Sadhan One’s regulated spiritual practices or discipline.
Sadhu Saddhu Holy man, ascetic.
Sama Veda The Veda of chanting; material mainly from the
Rig Veda, arranged for ritual chanting in worship.
Samsara Sansara The world - the place where transmigration (the
soul’s passage through a series of lives in
different species) occurs.
Samskar Sanskar, Samskara Sacraments designed to initiate a new stage of
life. There is usually a total of sixteen such rites of
passage (though many schools of thought do not
practise them all).
Sanatan Dharma The eternal or imperishable religion; also known
as Vedic Dharma. Adherents often prefer this term
to Hinduism since it characterises their belief in
the revealed and universal nature of religion.
Sannyasa The state of renunciation, the fourth stage of life.
Sannyasin Samyasin, Samnyasin A renunciate who, having given up worldly affairs
and attachments, has entered the fourth stage of
life, often as a mendicant.
Sanskrit Sacred language of the Hindu scriptures

Saraswati The power of knowledge, often represented by the
goddess Saraswati, the goddess of learning.
Sattva Sattwa
Goodness, or the potency to sustain and nourish;
one of the three gunas.
Seva Sewa Service, either to the divine or to humanity.
Shaivism Saivism The religion of Hindus who are devotees of Shiva.
Shakti Sakti Energy or power, especially of a Hindu feminine
deity.
Shiva Siva (many variants –
even Civa - have been
found)
A Hindu god. The name means
kindly or
auspicious.
Shivaratri Sivaratri The annual festival celebrated in February/March
in honour of Shiva. Also called Mahashivaratri.
Shraddha Sraddha Ceremony in which sanctified food is offered to the
poor and needy in memory of departed ancestors.
Shri Sri
Illustrious. Used as a title of respect, eg, Shri
Krishna. Also a respectful title for men. The
feminine form is Shrimati (Mrs).
Smriti Srti
That which is remembered. Scriptures less ancient
than the Vedas. Includes the Ramayana &
Mahabharata.
Sita Seeta The divine consort of Rama.
Shruti Srti, Sruti
That which is heard. A term specifically applied to
the four Vedas, including the Upanishads.
Sutra Sutta Short sayings or verses relating to various rituals,
or encapsulating profound philosophical meaning.
Swami Svami
Controller. Sometimes, more specifically,
Goswami
(one who can control his/her senses).
An honorific title applied to a religious teacher or
holy person, particularly the sannyasi.
Swastika Svastika From the Sanskrit for well-being; a mark of good
fortune. The four arms signify the four directions
(space), the four Vedas (knowledge), and the four
stages (time) in the life cycle. Not to be confused
with the Nazi symbol.
Tamas Ignorance or destructive potency; the lowest of the
three gunas.
Trimurti
The three deities. Refers to Brahma, Vishnu and
Shiva, who personify and control the three gunas.
They represent and control the three functions of
creation, preservation and destruction. ‘Trinity’
should be avoided.
Upanayana Ceremony when the sacred thread is tied - to mark
the start of learning with a guru.
Upanishad Upanisad
To sit down near. A sacred text based on the
teaching of a guru to a disciple. The Upanishads
explain the teachings of the Vedas.
Vaishnavism Vaisnavism The religion of Hindus who are devotees of the
god Vishnu.

Vaishya Vaisya The third of the four varnas of Hindu society,
composed of merchants and farmers.
Vanaprastha The third stage of life, typified by retirement and
asceticism.
Vanaprasthi Vanaprastha
Forest dweller. One who is in the third stage of life.
Varanasi Banares, Benares,
Kashi, Kasi
City on the river Ganges, sacred to Shiva. It is one
of the holiest pilgrimage sites and also an ancient
centre of learning.
Varna
Colour. The four principal divisions of Hindu
society. It is important to note that the word ‘caste’
refers strictly to sub-divisions within each varna,
and not to varnas themselves.
Varnashrama Varnasrama Dharma The system whereby society is divided into four
varnas (divisions) and life into four ashramas
(stages).
Varsha Pratipada The day of Creation, celebrated as New Year’s
Day by many Hindus.
Veda
Knowledge. Specifically refers to the four Vedas,
though any teaching which is consistent with the
conclusions of these scriptures is also accepted as
Vedic.
Vijay Dashmi Vijaya Dashami Another name for Dassehra.
Vishnu Visnu A Hindu god. With Brahma and Shiva forms the
Trimurti.
Vrat Vratam Vow. Often including abstention from certain
foods.
Vrindavan Brindavan Vrindavana
Brindaban
The sacred village connected with Krishna’s
pastimes as a youth.
Yajur Veda One of the four Vedas, dealing with the knowledge
of karma.
Yamuna Jamuna, Jumna Tributary of the river Ganga
(Ganges) considered
by many Hindus to be the most sacred of all holy
rivers.
Yatra Jatra
Pilgrimage. Usually to important sacred places in
India.
Yoga Communion; union of the soul with the Supreme,
or a process which promotes that relationship. The
English word ‘yoke’ is derived from yoga.
Yuga
Age, or extended period of time, of which there are
four