Sikh terms are drawn from the Punjabi language, and the versions below are based upon that
language. Many of these terms will also be found in books on Hinduism and Buddhism but with
somewhat different meanings. As with all transliterations, there are problems which are difficult to
resolve. This is particularly true when moving from the Gurmukhi script which has an alphabet of
35 letters, to the Roman alphabet which has only 26 letters.
Names of persons and places are only included in this list if variant forms are commonly used

Akal Purakh
The Eternal One. A designation frequently used of
God by Guru Nanak.
Akal Takht Akal Takhat
Throne of the Eternal; throne of the Timeless One.
Building facing the Golden Temple in Amritsar,
where Sikhs gather for political purposes.
Akhand Path Continuous reading of the Guru Granth Sahib from
beginning to end.
Amrit
Nectar. Sanctified liquid made of sugar and water,
used in initiation ceremonies.
Amrit ceremony Amrit Sanskar
Amrit Pahul
Khande di Pahul
Sometimes just ‘Amrit’
or ‘Taking Amrit’
(‘Amrit Chhakna’)
The Sikh rite of initiation into the Khalsa. ‘Baptism’
should not be used.
Anand karaj Anand Sanskar
Ceremony of bliss. Wedding ceremony.
Ardas
Prayer. The formal prayer offered at most religious
acts.
Baisakhi Vaisakhi A major Sikh festival celebrating the formation of
the Khalsa, 1699 CE.
Bangla Sahib The site of the martyrdom of Guru Har Krishan
(Delhi).
Bhai Khanaya A Sikh commended by Guru Gobind Singh for
serving water to the enemy wounded.
Bhai Lalo A humble carpenter who opened his house to
Guru Nanak. The Guru preferred Bhai Lalo’s
simple food to the offerings of a local rich
merchant.
Chanani Chandni Canopy over the scriptures, used as a mark of
respect.
Chauri Chaur Symbol of the authority of the Guru Granth Sahib.
Fan waved over scriptures, made of yak hairs or
nylon. It should not be called a ‘fly whisk’.
Dasam Granth Collection of compositions, some of which are
attributed to the tenth Sikh Guru, compiled some
years after his death.
Giani A person learned in the Sikh scriptures.
Granthi Reader of the Guru Granth Sahib, who officiates at
ceremonies.
Gurbani Bani, Vani Divine word revealed by the Gurus. The Shabads
contained in the Guru Granth Sahib.

Gurdwara Gurudwara Sikh place of worship. Literally the ‘doorway to the
Guru’.
Gurmat
The Guru’
s guidance.
Gurmukh One who lives by the Guru’s teaching.
Gurmukhi
From the Guru’
s mouth. Name given to the script
in which the scriptures and the Punjabi language
are written.
Gurpurb Gurpurab A Guru’s anniversary (birth or death). Also used
for other anniversaries, eg, of the installation of the
Adi Granth, 1604 CE.
Guru Teacher. In Sikhism, the title of Guru is reserved
for the ten human Gurus and the Guru Granth
Sahib.
Guru Arjan The fifth Guru who was the first Sikh martyr
(1563-1606).
Guru Gobind Singh Guru Govind Singh
(Original name:
Guru Gobind Rai)
Tenth Sikh Guru. It is important to note that the
title ‘Guru’ must be used with all the Gurus’
names. Sikhs usually use further terms of respect,
eg, Guru Gobind Singh Ji or Guru Nanak Dev Ji.
Guru Granth Sahib Adi Granth
(Granth’ by itself
should be avoided)
Primal collection of Sikh scriptures, compiled by
Guru Arjan and given its final form by Guru Gobind
Singh.
Guru Har Gobind Guru Hargobind Guru
Hargovind
Sixth Sikh Guru.
Guru Har Krishan
Guru Harkishan
Guru Harkrishan Eighth Sikh Guru.
Guru Nanak The first Guru and the founder of the Sikh faith
(1469-1539).
Guru Tegh Bahadur The ninth Guru who was martyred for the principle
of religious tolerance (1622-1675).
Haumai
Egoism. The major spiritual defect.
Hukam
God’
s will.
Hukam Vak Random reading taken for guidance from the Guru
Granth Sahib.
Ik Onkar
There is only One God. The first phrase of the
Mool Mantar. It is also used as a symbol to
decorate Sikh objects.
Janamsakhi Janam Sakhi
Birth stories. Hagiographic life stories of a Guru,
especially Guru Nanak.
Japji Sahib A morning prayer, composed by Guru Nanak,
which forms the first chapter of the Guru Granth
Sahib.
Jivan Mukt Jivan Mukht Enlightened while in the material body; a spiritually
enlightened person, freed from worldly bonds.
Kachera Traditional underwear/shorts. One of the five K’s
(see panj kakke).
Kakka Singular of the Punjabi
Ietter K (plural
‘Kakke’)
See panj kakke

Kangha Kanga Comb worn in the hair. One of the five K’s (see
panj kakke).
Kara Steel band worn on the right wrist. One of the five
K’s (see panj kakke).
Karah parshad Karah Prasad Sanctified food distributed at Sikh ceremonies.
Kaur
Princess. Name given to all Sikh females by Guru
Gobind Singh (see Singh).
Kesh Kes Uncut hair. One of the five K’s (see panj kakke).
Khalsa
The community of the pure. The Sikh community.
Khanda Double-edged sword used in the initiation
ceremony. Also used as the emblem on the Sikh
flag.
Kirat karna Earning one’s livelihood by one’s own efforts.
Kirpan Sword. One of the five K’s (see panj kakke).
‘Dagger’ should be avoided.
Kirtan Devotional singing of the compositions found in
the Guru Granth Sahib.
Kirtan Sohila A prayer said before retiring for sleep. It is also
used at the cremation ceremony and when the
Guru Granth Sahib is laid to rest.
Kurahit Prohibitions, eg intoxicants.
Langar Guru ka Langar
Guru’
s kitchen. The gurdwara dining hall and the
food served in it.
Mela
Fair. Used of Sikh festivals which are not
gurpurbs.
Manji Manji Sahib Small platform on which the scripture is placed.
Manmukh Munmukh Self-orientated (as opposed to gurmukh).
Mool Mantar Mul Mantar
Basic teaching; essential teaching. The basic
statement of belief at the beginning of the Guru
Granth Sahib.
Nam Simran Nam Simaran
Naam Simran
Meditation on the divine name, using passages of
scripture.
Nankana Sahib Birthplace of Guru Nanak. Now in Pakistan.
Nishan Sahib Sikh flag flown at gurdwaras.
Nit nem The recitation of specified daily prayers.
Panj kakke
The five K’
s. The symbols of Sikhism worn by
Sikhs.
Panj piare Panj Pyare
(other forms may also
be found)
The five beloved ones. Those first initiated into the
Khalsa; those who perform the rite today.
Panth The Sikh community.
Patases Patashas Sugar bubbles or crystals used to prepare Amrit.
Punjab Panjab
Land of five rivers. The area of India in which
Sikhism originated.
Ragi Sikh musician who sings compositions from the
Guru Granth Sahib

Rahit Sikh obligations, eg, to meditate on God.
Rahit Maryada Rehat Maryada Sikh Code of Discipline.
Sadhsangat Sangat Congregation or assembly of Sikhs.
Sewa Seva Service directed at the sadhsangat and gurdwara,
but also to humanity in general.
Shabad Sabad Shabd
Word. Hymn from the Guru Granth Sahib; the
divine word.
Sikh
Learner; disciple. A person who believes in the ten
Gurus and the Guru Granth Sahib, and who has
no other religion.
Singh
Lion. Name adopted by Sikh males (see kaur).
Sis Ganj Sahib The site of the martyrdom of Guru Tegh Bahadur
(Delhi).
Vak Vaak
A random reading taken for guidance from the
Guru Granth Sahib.
Vand chhakna Sharing one’s time, talents and earnings with the
less fortunate.
Waheguru
Wonderful Lord. A Sikh name for God.