assemblies Groupings of the Roman citizens convened to carry out specific
tasks.
auxiliaries Elements of the Roman army made up of non-citizens, distin-
guished from legionaries, who were citizens.
bucellarii Units of soldiers in the late Roman and Byzantine empire, sup-
ported not by the state but rather by an individual general or governor.
censor Magistrate in charge of public morality, most importantly in
monitoring the citizen list and the rolls of the senate. In the imperial
period the emperors discharged the duties of the censor.
centurion The commander of a legionary “century,” consisting originally
of 100 men but by the imperial period of 80.
cognomen The third element of a Roman name, sometimes reflecting a
supposed ancestral physical attribute, sometimes a title granted to mark
an achievement.
cohort An operational unit of the Roman army; there were ten cohorts to
a legion. The term is also used of independent units of the auxiliaries.
colony/colonia Originally a settlement of Roman citizens, usually veterans.
Later the status could be conferred on other towns as a mark of distinction.
consul The senior Roman magistrate. Two were elected at a time for a
period of a year.
denarius Silver coin, worth 4 sestertii.
dictator A magistrate elected during the republic in an emergency. He would
hold office for six months.
diocese One of twelve large administrative units into which the provinces
were grouped at the end of the third century, each headed by a vicarius of
the praetorian prefects.
donative A distribution of cash to mark a special occasion.
duces Military commanders. In the later empire duces assisted the governors
of provinces and, after Diocletian’s reforms, the vicarii of dioceses.

equestrian Member of an order originally related to service in the cavalry,
latterly of citizens with a property qualification of 400,000 sestertii.
Although not eligible for the Roman senate, members of the order (also
known as knights) played an important part in the administration of
the empire in the imperial period, and held certain key offices, such as the
prefectures of Egypt and of the praetorian guard.
excubitors A palace guard corps, raised by the emperor Leo, to offset the
influence of Germans in the imperial army.
freedman A former slave who has been granted his freedom. Often the freed-
man would stay in the service of the household where he had been slave.
imperator During the republic a victorious general would be acclaimed as
imperator (commander) by his troops. In the imperial period commanders
served as the emperor’s legates and the salutations that followed their
successes became the prerogative of the emperor.
imperium The power to command, assigned for a fixed period to magis-
trates of a certain rank.
iuridici Senior officials in the provinces with broad activity in judicial
matters, operating independently of the governor.
knight See equestrian.
legate A broad term with three common meanings: (a) an individual
assigned a particular task; (b) the commander of a legion; (c) the governor
of an imperial province.
legion The major operational unit of the Roman army, consisting of
between 5,000 and 6,000 men, all Roman citizens, under the command
of a legate appointed by the emperor.
magister memoriae (“master of memory”) Important official in the later
empire, who drafted and issued imperial decisions and responded to
appeals.
magister militum (“master of the soldiers”) A post created by Constantine,
its holder selected from the senior military commanders within the empire.
maiestas See “treason law.”
nomen The central element of a Roman name, indicating the holder’s gens
or family.
pater patriae (“father of the fatherland”) In the republican period this title
was granted first to Cicero for exceptional service to the state. In 2 bc it
was conferred on Augustus, who considered it his most significant honor
and initially refused it. Tiberius seems never to have accepted the title
officially. Even Caligula delayed accepting it.
patrician Member of a select branch of the Roman aristocracy that con-
trolled power in the early republic. The status could only be passed down
within the family for most of the republican period, but as the numbers

fell new grants of patrician standing were made by Julius Caesar and his
successors.
plebeian Originally, member of the lower order of citizens who were not
patrician. By the imperial age there were several prominent and distin-
guished plebeian families.
plebeian tribune Magistrate originally charged with protecting the plebeians
against the patricians. During the republic the tribune was powerful,
because of his right to veto and to initiate legislation, while the person
of the holder was sacrosanct. Under the empire the importance declined
and the office became a routine stage between the quaestorship and
praetorship.
pontiff Member of one of the four priestly colleges of Rome. The pontifex
maximus was the senior priest (see “supreme pontiff ”).
praenomen The first element in the name of a Roman man, the “given”
name. There was a very limited number of such names.
praetor The senior magistrate after the consuls. His main task was to pre-
side over the courts.
praetorian guard The imperial guard, originally consisting of nine cohorts,
under the command of a prefect or pair of prefects.
prefect This term meant basically “the person placed in charge,” and could
have a range of applications, both military and administrative. The more
significant military ones were (a) the commander of an auxiliary unit or
of the fleet; (b) camp prefect, second-in-command to the legionary legate
and commander of the troops in the legate’s absence; and (c) commander
of the praetorian guard and of the fire service (vigiles). The key adminis-
trative prefects were the governor of Egypt and the prefect of the grain
supply. All those prefectures were held by equestrians. The ancient office
of city prefect (praefectus urbi) was held by a senator of consular rank. By
the late republic his duties were largely ritual, but his functions were
revived by Augustus, and he was given responsibility for maintaining
order in the city and commanding the city police (the cohortes urbanae);
he was allowed to exercise summary justice in dealing with minor criminal
cases and gradually assumed responsibility for more serious cases. In the
late empire he wielded considerable power.
proconsul The senatorial governor of a “public” province, chosen by lot.
procurator A highly flexible term. It is used of a private agent or bailiff on
an estate. From Claudius on, the term is used of administrators of small
districts like Judea. There were also procurators who oversaw financial
business relating to the imperial properties within the provinces, some of
whom eventually assumed official administrative duties, as “provincial”

procurators, in subordinate roles to the governors, in both the imperial
and senatorial provinces. The position was held by equestrians or freedmen.
propraetor The governor of a province with the rank of praetor. Legates
(governors) of imperial provinces held this rank, so as to be outranked by
the consular authority of the emperor.
protectores Soldiers who belonged to one of the branches of the imperial
guard in the later empire, appointed for their service and proven
competence.
province The term initially referred to the sphere of competence of a magis-
trate but acquired a more geographical character, defining individual
external territories governed by Rome. Following the Augustan settlement
external provinces were of two types. “Imperial” provinces, in the unsettled
part of the empire, housed Roman legions and were administered by
governors appointed directly by the emperor. Some smaller districts were
governed by equestrians with the rank of procurator from Claudius on
(the title of prefect is usual earlier). Egypt was a major imperial province
in its own class, governed by an equestrian prefect. “Public” provinces, in
the more stable areas, with rare exceptions did not house legions. Public
provinces were governed by proconsuls, men of the senatorial class elected
by lot.
quaestor A magistrate who by virtue of this office became a member of the
senate. The duties were often financial.
rescript Written answer by an emperor to a legal query.
Secular Games A festival that marked the end of one era (saeculum) and the
beginning of another. It was held on April 21, the traditional birthday
of the city.
senate The senior governing body of the Roman state, made up of ex-
magistrates of at least the rank of quaestor and of others deemed worthy
by the censor or by the emperor. Under Augustus the number was appro-
ximately 600, each with an individual census rating of 1,000,000 sestertii.
sestertius The highest-value base-metal Roman coin, made of an alloy of
zinc and copper. It is used by the Romans as the basic unit to express
monetary values, with the symbol HS.
supreme pontiff (pontifex maximus) The senior priest of Rome. From
12 bc the office was held by the emperor.
toga The traditional public dress of Roman men, made of fine white wool.
Boys wore the toga praetexta with a purple border. At about fourteen, they
put this aside for a plain white version, the toga virilis, in a ceremony that
marked the transition to manhood. The wearing of the toga praetexta was
resumed by those entering into curule magistracies.

treason law The laws against maiestas were the chief source of dread and
resentment in the imperial period. From Augustus on they provided
protection against verbal abuse and slander (such protection also existed
under the republic, though it was never invoked). An insult to the
emperor or a member of his family was an insult to the state.
treasury The state treasury was housed in the Temple of Saturn on the
Capitoline hill. It was used also as a depository for senatorial documents.
tribunician authority Emperors did not hold the office of tribune of the
plebeians, but they were granted the tribune’s authority (tribunicia potestas)
and his sacrosanctity. This authority was in many ways the foundation
of the imperial position, and emperors dated their accession from the time
of its bestowal.
triumph The procession led by a commander, after a major victory, through
Rome to the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline hill, accompanied by
war booty and prisoners of war. In the imperial period the triumph was
restricted to members of the imperial family.
triumphal regalia Legates of the emperor could not celebrate personal
triumphs and their victories were recognized by the right to wear the garb
of the triumphator.
vigintiviri Holders of the minor offices often assumed by individuals on the
first rung of an administrative or political career.