Alien
Someone who resides in a country but is not yet a citizen of that country.

Amphibious invasion
A combined ground and naval assault, often supported by attack aircraft

Anti-Semitism
Discrimination or prejudice against Jews

Appeasement
A policy by which France and Great Britain tried unsuccessfully to prevent Adolf Hitler from
starting a European war by conceding to some of his demands to annex territory and reject
treaty obligations.

Armistice
A temporary truce or suspension of wartime hostilities.

Aryan
An imagined racial category referring to non-Jewish Caucasians, especially of Nordic or
northern European origin.

Belligerent
A nation at war.

Blitzkrieg
German for “lightning war,” the term refers to a sudden, powerful attack with tanks, infantry,
and planes designed to quickly knock out an enemy.

Conscription
Obligatory military enrollment, also known as a “draft.”

Counteroffensive
An attempt to retake territory or gains lost as a result of an enemy offensive.

Coup
A sudden, violent, and illegal seizure of power.

Destroyer
A relatively small, fast naval ship equipped for defense against submarines and aircraft.


Fascism
A governing ideology based on absolute authority of a dictator, suppression of opposition and
criticism, aggressive nationalism, and often racism.

Gestapo
Adolf Hitler’s secret police, originally established in 1933. Its agents dressed in civilian
clothing

Grand Alliance
A coalition led by the United States, Great Britain, the Soviet Union, and the Free French
dedicated to defeating the Axis powers during World War II.

Intelligence
Information about the activities of an enemy or potential enemy, or an organization that
collects such information

Isolationism
A policy in which a nation aims to remain at peace by avoiding international obligations
and involvement in the affairs of other nations.

Logistics
The business side of war, especially procuring, maintaining, and transporting equipment
and supplies.

Mobilization
Assembling equipment, supplies, and people for war

Nationalism
An ideology in which the interests of one’s own nation are more important than the
interests of other nations or the common interests of all nations.

Neutrality
A nation’s policy of noninvolvement in a war between other nations

Nonaggression pact
An agreement between two or more nations not to attack one another

Panzer
German for “armor.” A German tank used in World War II

Reichstag
The German national legislature under both the Weimar Republic and Adolf Hitler’s Third
Reich. During Hitler’s rule, the Reichstag was mostly a rubber stamp for his policies

Reparations
Money paid by the losers of a war to the winners to compensate for damages and loss of
property, lives, and productivity.

Rout
An overwhelming military defeat that leaves the losing army in complete disorder

Second front
After the Soviet Union began fighting Nazi Germany in 1941, Soviet Premier Joseph
Stalin demanded that his allies open up another campaign elsewhere in Europe, which
would force Adolf Hitler to divide his forces and ease the pressure on the Soviet army

Schutzstaffel (SS)
A paramilitary group organized by the Nazi Party in the 1920s to provide security at party
meetings and harass political enemies. The SS ran concentration camps and manned
military units known for their extreme brutality and fighting prowess

Spheres of influence
Areas in which another country has power and influence even without having formal
authority

Vichy France
Name given to the government nominally ruling southern France while northern France
was occupied by Nazi forces. The regime was headed by Marshal Philippe Pétain and
headquartered in the town of Vichy