The Basilisk

Appearance: A well-known creature from fantasy lore, the Basilisk is a snake-like monster, which has also been known to have multicoloured feathers on occasion. A swipe from its tail can be devastating, while its sharp fangs make it a formidable close-quarters opponent. Other features include scales, webbed wings, and V-shaped legs.
The Chernobog
The Witcher - Chernobog
Netflix

Appearance: Little is known about this mysterious monster, which has only recently started cropping up around the continent, but it certainly leaves an impression with its black exoskeleton, bright yellow eyes and enormous wings, while it proves to be quite deadly with its razor-sharp fangs and talons.

The Zeugl
The Witcher - Zeugl
Netflix

Appearance: This tentacled beast dwells underwater, but rather than a picturesque countryside stream it opts for the rancid sewers of Oxenfurt. They often make short work of anyone foolish enough to approach their habitat, with a giant mouth packed with multiple rows of teeth.

The Myriapod

Appearance: This monstrosity is among the most terrifying Geralt will face in season two. It's bizarrely composited body includes the skull of a wolf, the horns of a ram, a segmented body similar to that of a centipede, and even some human-like hands sprouting from its torso. Swipe left.

The Leshy
The Witcher – The Leshy
Netflix/YouTube

Appearance: One for nature-lovers, the Leshy bears strong resemblance to a tree, only it has some more humanoid features that give it a way. Branches cluster together to create arms, legs and antlers, meaning they blend perfectly into their home in the woods, over which they are fiercely protective and very rarely leave.

The Bruxa
The Witcher – The Bruxa
Netflix/YouTube

Appearance: While the Bruxa can shapeshift into the form of a beautiful human woman, her true appearance is usually smaller, capable of incredible feats of agility with her webbed wings. Those unfortunate enough to see her feed will be horrified as she dislocates her jaw to reveal a row of needle-like teeth.


Vampire

Vampires are a little bit more recognizable that erynias and ekhidnas, sure, but what about bruxae? Alps? Ekkimaras?

What’s great about the depiction of vampires in The Witcher is that it separates them into categories. Higher vampires resemble the kind of tall, dark, and handsome archetype inspired by Bram Stoker’s landmark novel, “Dracula,” whereas vampires like fleders are more animalistic in appearance (and mannerisms).


Pixies are elementa that inhabit the Land of a Thousand Fables. They only appear in the Blood and Wine expansion and The Witcher: Monster Slayer
