A
abrasion The wearing away of the landscape by
rivers, glaciers, the sea or wind, caused by the load
of debris that they carry. See also corrasion.
abrasion platform See wave-cut platform.
accuracy A measure of the degree of correctness.
acid rain Rain that contains a high concentration
of pollutants, notably sulphur and nitrogen oxides.
These pollutants are produced from factories,
power stations burning fossil fuels, and car
exhausts. Once in the atmosphere, the sulphur
and nitrogen oxides combine with moisture to give
sulphuric and nitric acids which fall as corrosive
rain.
administrative region An area in which
organizations carry out administrative functions;
for example, the regions of local health authorities
and water companies, and commercial sales
regions.
adult literacy rate A percentage measure which
shows the proportion of an adult population able
to read. It is one of the measures used to assess the
level of development of a country.
aerial photograph A photograph taken from
above the ground. There are two types of aerial
photograph – a vertical photograph (or ‘bird’s-
eye view’) and an oblique photograph where the
camera is held at an angle. Aerial photographs
are often taken from aircraft and provide useful
information for map-making and surveys.
Compare satellite image.
afforestation The conversion of open land to
forest; especially, in Britain, the planting of
coniferous trees in upland areas for commercial
gain. Compare deforestation.
agglomerate A mass of coarse rock fragments or
blocks of lava produced during a volcanic eruption.
agribusiness Modern intensive farming which
uses machinery and artificial fertilizers to increase
yield and output.
Thus agriculture resembles an industrial process
in which the general running and managing of the
farm could parallel that of large-scale industry.
agriculture Human management of the
en vironment to produce food. The numerous
forms of agriculture fall into three groups:
commercial agriculture, subsistence agriculture
and peasant agriculture. See also agribusiness.
aid The provision of finance, personnel
and equipment for furthering economic
development and improving standards of living
in the Third World. Most aid is organized by
international institutions (e.g. the United Nations),
by charities (e.g. Oxfam) (see non-governmental
organizations (NGOs); or by national governments.
Aid to a country from the international institutions
is called multilateral aid. Aid from one country to
another is called bilateral aid.
air mass A large body of air with generally the same
temperature and moisture conditions throughout.
Warm or cold and moist air masses usually develop
over large bodies of water (oceans). Hot or cold and
dry air masses develop over large land areas
(continents).
alluvial fan A cone of sediment deposited
at an abrupt change of slope; for example, where
a post-glacial stream meets the flat floor of a
U-shaped valley. Alluvial fans are also common
in arid regions where streams flowing off
escarpments may periodically carry large loads of
sediment during flash fl oods.
alluvium Material deposited by a river in
its middle and lower course. Alluvium comprises
silt, sand and coarser debris eroded from the
river’s upper course and transported downstream.
Alluvium is deposited in a graded sequence:
coarsest first (heaviest) and finest last (lightest).
Regular floods in the lower course create extensive
layers of alluvium which can build up to a
considerable depth on the flood plain.
alp A gentle slope above the steep sides of
a glaciated valley, often used for summer grazing.
See also transhumance.
analysis The examination of the constituent parts
of a complex entity.
anemometer An instrument for measuring the
velocity of the wind. An anemometer should be
fixed on a post at least 5 m above ground level. The
wind blows the cups around and the speed is read
off the dial in km/hr (or knots).
annotation Labels in the form of text or graphics
that can be individually selected, positioned or
stored in a database.
antarctic circle Imaginary line that encircles the
South Pole at latitude 66º 32'S.
anthracite A hard form of coal with a high carbon
content and few impurities.
anticline An arch in folded strata; the opposite of
syncline. See fold.
anticyclone An area of high atmospheric pressure
with light winds, clear skies and settled weather.
In summer, anticyclones are associated with warm
and sunny conditions; in winter, they bring frost
and fog as well as sunshine.
API (application programming interface) A set
of interfaces, methods, procedures and tools used
to build or customise a software program.
aquifer See artesian basin.
arable farming The production of cereal and root
crops – as opposed to the keeping of livestock.
arc A coverage feature class representing lines and
polygon boundaries.
archipelago A group or chain of islands.
arctic circle Imaginary line that encircles the North
Pole at latitude 66º 32'N.
arête A knife-edged ridge separating two corries
in a glaciated upland. The arête is formed by the
progressive enlargement of corries by weathering
and erosion. See also pyramidal peak.
artesian basin This consists of a shallow syncline
with a layer of permeable rock, e.g. chalk,
sandwiched between two impermeable layers, e.g.
clay. Where the permeable rock is exposed at the
surface, rainwater will enter the rock and the rock
will become saturated. This is known as an aquifer.
Boreholes can be sunk into the structure to tap the
water in the aquifer.
asymmetrical fold Folded strata where the two
limbs are at different angles to the horizontal.
atlas A collection of maps.
atmosphere The air which surrounds the Earth,
and consists of three layers:
the troposphere (6 to 10km from the Earth’s surface),
the stratosphere (50km from the Earth’s surface), and
the mesosphere and ionosphere, an ionised region of
rarefied gases (1000km from the Earth’s surface).
The atmosphere comprises oxygen (21%), nitrogen
(78%), carbon dioxide, argon, helium and other
gases in minute quantities.
attrition The process by which a river’s load is
alluvial fan
alp
anemometer
anticyclone
arête
asymmetrical fold
Using the Dictionary
Geographical terms in the
dictionary are arranged
alphabetically. Bold words in
an entry identify key terms which
are explained in greater detail
within separate entries of their
own. Important terms which
do not have separate entries are
shown in italic and are explained
in the entry in which they occur.
eroded through particles, such as pebbles and
boulders, striking each other.
B
backwash The return movement of seawater off the
beach after a wave has broken. See also longshore
drift and swash.
bar graph A graph on which the values of
a certain variable are shown by the length
of shaded columns, which are numbered
in sequence. Compare histogram.
barchan A type of crescent-shaped sand dune
formed in desert regions where the wind direction
is very constant. Wind blowing round the edges of
the dune causes the crescent shape, while the dune
may advance in a downwind direction as particles
are blown over the crest.
barograph An aneroid barometer connected to an
arm and inked pen which records pressure changes
continuously on a rotating drum. The drum
usually takes a week to make one rotation.
barometer An instrument for measuring
atmospheric pressure. There are two types,
the mercury barometer and the aneroid barometer.
The mercury barometer consists of a glass tube
containing mercury which fluctuates in height as
pressure varies. The aneroid barometer is a small
metal box from which some of the air has been
removed. The box expands and contracts as the
air pressure changes. A series of levers joined to a
pointer shows pressure on a dial.
barrage A type of dam built across a wide stretch
of water, e.g. an estuary, for the purposes of water
management. Such a dam may be intended to
provide water supply, to harness wave energy or to
control flooding, etc. There is a large barrage across
Cardiff Bay in South Wales.
basalt A dark, fine-grained extrusive igneous rock
formed when magma emerges onto the Earth’s
surface and cools rapidly. A succession of basalt
lava flows may lead to the formation of a lava
plateau.
base flow The water fl owing in a stream which is
fed only by groundwater. During dry periods it is
only the base flow which passes through the stream
channel.
base map Map on which thematic information can
be placed.
batholith A large body of igneous material intruded
into the Earth’s crust. As the batholith slowly cools,
large-grained rocks such as granite are formed.
Batholiths may eventually be exposed at the Earth’s
surface by the removal of overlying rocks through
weathering and erosion.
bay An indentation in the coastline with a headland
on either side. Its formation is due to the more
rapid erosion of softer rocks
beach A strip of land sloping gently towards the sea,
usually recognized as the area lying between high
and low tide marks.
bearing A compass reading between
0 and 360 degrees, indicating direction
of one location from another.
Beaufort wind scale An international scale of wind
velocities, ranging from 0 (calm) to 12 (hurricane).
bedrock The solid rock which usually lies beneath
the soil.
bergschrund A large crevasse located at the rear of
a corrie icefield in a glaciated region, formed by the
weight of the ice in the corrie dragging away from the
rear wall as the glacier moves downslope.
biodiversity The existence of a wide variety of plant
and animal species in their natural environment.
biogas The production of methane and carbon
dioxide, which can be obtained from plant or crop
waste. Biogas is an example of a renewable source
of energy (see renewable resources, nonrenewable
resources).
biomass The total number of living organisms,
both plant and animal, in a given area.
biome A complex community of plants and animals
in a specifi c physical and climatic region. See
climate.
biosphere The part of the Earth which contains
living organisms. The biosphere contains a variety
of habitats, from the highest mountains to the
deepest oceans.
birth rate The number of live births per 1000
people in a population per year.
bituminous coal Sometimes called house coal – a
medium-quality coal with some impurities; the
typical domestic coal. It is also the major fuel
source for thermal power stations.
block mountain or horst A section of the Earth’s
crust uplifted by faulting. Mt Ruwenzori in the
East African Rift System is an example of a block
mountain.
blowhole A crevice, joint or fault in coastal rocks,
enlarged by marine erosion. A blowhole often
leads from the rear of a cave (formed by wave action
at the foot of a cliff) up to the cliff top. As waves
break in the cave they erode the roof at the point
of weakness and eventually a hole is formed. Air
and sometimes spray are forced up the blowhole to
erupt at the surface.
bluff See river cliff.
boreal forest See taiga.
boulder clay or till The unsorted mass of debris
dragged along by a glacier as ground moraine and
dumped as the glacier melts. Boulder clay may
be several metres thick and may comprise any
combination of finely ground ‘rock flour’, sand,
pebbles or boulders.
breakwater or groyne A wall built at right angles
to a beach in order to prevent sand loss due to
longshore drift.
breccia Rock fragments cemented together by a
matrix of finer material; the fragments are angular
and unsorted. An example of this is volcanic
breccia, which is made up of coarse angular
fragments of lava and crust rocks welded by finer
material such as ash and tuff .
buffers Memory devices for temporarily storing
data.
bush fallowing or shifting cultivation
A system of agriculture in which there are no
permanent fields. For example in the tropical
rainforest, remote societies cultivate forest
clearings for one year and then move on. The
system functions successfully when forest
regeneration occurs over a sufficiently long period
to allow the soil to regain its fertility.
bar graph
barchan
batholith
bay
beach
bearing The bearing from A to B is 110º.
bergschrund
blowhole
breakwater or groyne
bushfire An uncontrolled fire in forests and
grasslands.
business park An out-of-town site accommodating
offices, high-technology companies and light
industry. Compare science park.
butte An outlier of a mesa in arid regions.
C
cache A small high-speed memory that improves
computer performance.
caldera A large crater formed by the collapse of the
summit cone of a volcano during an eruption. The
caldera may contain subsidiary cones built up by
subsequent eruptions, or a crater lake if the
volcano is extinct or dormant.
canal An artificial waterway, usually connecting
existing rivers, lakes or oceans, constructed for
navigation and transportation.
canyon A deep and steep-sided river valley
occurring where rapid vertical corrasion takes
place in arid regions. In such an environment the
rate of weathering of the valley sides is slow. If
the rocks of the region are relatively soft then the
canyon profile becomes even more pronounced.
The Grand Canyon of the Colorado River in the
USA is the classic example.
capital city Seat of government of a country or
political unit.
cartogram A map showing statistical data in
diagrammatic form.
cartography The technique of drawing maps or
charts.
catchment 1. In physical geography, an alternative
term to river basin.
2. In human geography, an area around a town or
city – hence ‘labour catchment’ means the area
from which an urban workforce is drawn.
cavern In limestone country, a large underground
cave formed by the dissolving of limestone by
subterranean streams.
See also stalactite, stalagmite.
cay A small low island or bank composed of sand
and coral fragments. Commonly found in the
Caribbean Sea.
CBD (Central Business District) This is the
central zone of a town or city, and is characterized by
high accessibility, high land values and limited space.
The visible result of these factors is a concentration
of high-rise buildings at the city centre. The CBD is
dominated by retail and business functions, both of
which require maximum accessibility.
CFCs (Chlorofluorocarbons) Chemicals used
in the manufacture of some aerosols, the cooling
systems of refrigerators and fast-food cartons.
These chemicals are harmful to the ozone layer.
chalk A soft, whitish sedimentary rock formed by
the accumulation of small fragments of skeletal
matter from marine organisms; the rock may
be almost pure calcium carbonate. Due to the
permeable and soluble nature of the rock, there is
little surface drainage in chalk landscapes.
channel See strait.
chernozem A deep, rich soil of the plains of
southern Russia. The upper horizons are rich in
lime and other plant nutrients; in the dry climate
the predominant movement of soil moisture is
upwards (contrast with leaching), and lime and
other chemical nutrients therefore accumulate in
the upper part of the soil profile.
chloropleth map See shading map.
choropleth A symbol or marked area on a map
which denotes the distribution of some property.
cirrus High, wispy or strand-like, thin cloud
associated with the advance of a depression.
clay A soil composed of very small particles of
sediment, less than 0.002 mm in diameter. Due
to the dense packing of these minute particles,
clay is almost totally impermeable, i.e. it does not
allow water to drain through. Clay soils very rapidly
waterlog in wet weather.
cliff A steep rockface between land and sea, the
profile of which is determined largely by the nature
of the coastal rocks. For example, resistant rocks
such as granite (e.g. at Land’s End, England) will
produce steep and rugged cliffs.
climate The average atmospheric conditions
prevailing in a region, as distinct from its weather.
A statement of climate is concerned with long-
term trends. Thus the climate of, for example, the
Amazon Basin is described as hot and wet all the
year round; that of the Mediterranean Region as
having hot dry summers and mild wet winters.
See extreme climate, maritime climate.
clint A block of limestone, especially when part
of a limestone pavement, where the surface is
composed of clints and grykes.
cloud A mass of small water drops or ice crystals
formed by the condensation of water vapour in the
atmosphere, usually at a considerable height above
the Earth’s surface. There are three main types of
cloud: cumulus, stratus and cirrus, each of which
has many variations.
CMYK A colour model that combines cyan,
magenta, yellow and black to create a range of
colours.
coal A sedimentary rock composed of decayed
and compressed vegetative matter. Coal is usually
classified according to a scale of hardness and
purity ranging from anthracite (the hardest),
through bituminous coal and lignite to peat.
cold front See depression.
commercial agriculture A system of agriculture in
which food and materials are produced specifically
for sale in the market, in contrast to subsistence
agriculture. Commercial agriculture tends to be
capital intensive. See also agribusiness.
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP)
The policy of the European Union to support and
subsidize certain crops and methods of animal
husbandry.
common land Land which is not in the ownership
of an individual or institution, but which is
historically available to any member of the local
community.
communications The contacts and linkages in
an environment. For example, roads and railways
are communications, as are telephone systems,
newspapers, and radio and television.
commuter zone An area on or near to the outskirts
of an urban area. Commuters are among the
most affluent and mobile members of the urban
community and can afford the greatest physical
separation of home and work.
concordant coastline A coastline that is parallel to
mountain ranges immediately inland. A rise in sea
level or a sinking of the land cause the valleys to be
flooded by the sea and the mountains to become a
line of islands. Compare discordant coastline.
condensation The process by which cooling
vapour turns into a liquid. Clouds, for example,
are formed by the condensation of water vapour
caldera
canyon
cliff
cloud
concordant coastline
in the atmosphere.
coniferous forest A forest of evergreen trees such
as pine, spruce and fir. Natural coniferous forests
occur considerably further north than forests of
broad-leaved deciduous species, as coniferous trees
are able to withstand harsher climatic conditions.
The taiga areas of the northern hemisphere consist
of coniferous forests.
conservation The preservation and management
of the natural environment. In its strictest form,
conservation may mean total protection of
endangered species and habitats, as in nature
reserves. In some cases, conservation of the man-
made environment, e.g. ancient buildings,
is undertaken.
continent One of the earth’s large land masses. The
world’s continents are generally defined as Asia,
Africa, North America, South America, Europe,
Oceania and Antarctica.
continental climate The climate at the centre of
large landmasses, typifi ed by a large annual range
in temperature, with precipitation most likely in
the summer.
continental drift The theory that the Earth’s
continents move gradually over a layer of semi-
molten rock underneath the Earth’s crust. It is
thought that the present-day continents once
formed the supercontinent, Pangaea, which
existed approximately 200 million years ago. See also
Gondwanaland, Laurasia and plate tectonics.
continental shelf The seabed bordering the
continents, which is covered by shallow water
– usually of less than 200 metres. Along some
coastlines the continental shelf is so narrow it is
almost absent.
contour A line drawn on a map to join all places at
the same height above sea level.
conurbation A continuous built-up urban area
formed by the merging of several formerly separate
towns or cities. Twentieth-century urban sprawl
has led to the merging of towns.
coombe See dry valley.
cooperative A system whereby individuals pool their
resources in order to optimize individual gains.
coordinates A set of numbers that defines the
location of a point with reference to a system of
axes.
core 1. In physical geography, the core is the
innermost zone of the Earth. It is probably solid at
the centre, and composed of iron and nickel.
2. In human geography, a central place or central
region, usually the centre of economic and political
activity in a region or nation.
corrasion The abrasive action of an agent of
erosion (rivers, ice, the sea) caused by its load. For
example the pebbles and boulders carried along
by a river wear away the channel bed and the river
bank. Compare with hydraulic action.
corrie, cirque or cwm A bowl-shaped hollow on a
mountainside in a glaciated region; the area where
a valley glacier originates. In glacial times the
corrie contained an icefield, which in cross
section appears as in diagram a above. The shape
of the corrie is determined by the rotational
erosive force of ice as the glacier moves downslope
(diagram b).
corrosion Erosion by solution action, such as the
dissolving of limestone by running water.
crag Rocky outcrop on a valley side formed,
for example, when a truncated spur exists in a
glaciated valley.
crag and tail A feature of lowland glaciation, where
a resistant rock outcrop withstands erosion by a
glacier and remains as a feature after the Ice Age.
Rocks of volcanic or metamorphic origin are likely
to produce such a feature. As the ice advances over
the crag, material will be eroded from the face and
sides and will be deposited as a mass of boulder
clay and debris on the leeward side, thus producing
a ‘tail’.
crevasse A crack or fissure in a glacier resulting
from the stressing and fracturing of ice at a change
in gradient or valley shape.
cross section A drawing of a vertical section of a
line of ground, deduced from a map. It depicts the
topography of a system of contours.
crust The outermost layer of the Earth,
representing only 0.1% of the Earth’s total volume.
It comprises continental crust and oceanic crust,
which differ from each other in age as well as in
physical and chemical characteristics. The crust,
together with the uppermost layer of the mantle, is
also known as the lithosphere.
culvert An artifi cial drainage channel for
transporting water quickly from place to place.
cumulonimbus A heavy, dark cloud of great
vertical height. It is the typical thunderstorm
cloud, producing heavy showers of rain, snow
or hail. Such clouds form where intense solar
radiation causes vigorous convection.
cumulus A large cloud (smaller than a
cumulonimbus) with a ‘cauliflower’ head and
almost horizontal base. It is indicative of fair or,
at worst, showery weather in generally sunny
conditions.
cut-off See oxbow lake.
cyclone See hurricane.
D
dairying A pastoral farming system in which dairy
cows produce milk that is used by itself or used
to produce dairy products such as cheese, butter,
cream and yoghurt.
dam A barrier built across a stream, river or estuary
to create a body of water.
data A series of observations, measurements or
facts which can be operated on by a computer
programme.
data capture Any process for converting
information into a form that can be handled by a
computer.
database A large store of information. A GIS
database includes data about spatial locations and
shapes of geographical features.
datum A single piece of information.
death rate The number of deaths per 1000 people
in a population per year.
deciduous woodland Trees which are generally of
broad-leaved rather than coniferous habit, and
which shed their leaves during the cold season.
defl ation The removal of loose sand by wind
erosion in desert regions. It often exposes a bare
rock surface beneath.
deforestation The practice of clearing trees.
Much deforestation is a result of development
pressures, e.g. trees are cut down to provide land
for agriculture and industry. Compare afforestation.
delta A fan-shaped mass consisting of the
deposited load of a river where it enters the sea. A
delta only forms where the river deposits material
at a faster rate than can be removed by coastal
currents. While deltas may take almost any shape
and size, three types are generally recognized, as
shown in the diagram overleaf.
DEM (Digital elevation model)
Representation of the relief of a topographic
surface.
denudation The wearing away of the Earth’s
surface by the processes of weathering and erosion.
depopulation A long-term decrease in the
population of any given area, frequently caused by
economic migration to other areas.
deposition The laying down of sediments resulting
from denudation.
(a) A corrie in glacial times.
(b) Erosion of a corrie.
crag and tail
crevasse
cross section Map and corresponding cross section.
depression An area of low atmospheric pressure
occurring where warm and cold air masses come
into contact. The passage of a depression is
marked by thickening cloud, rain, a period of dull
and drizzly weather and then clearing skies with
showers. A depression develops as in the diagrams
below.
desert An area where all forms of precipitation are
so low that very little, if anything, can grow.
Deserts can be broadly divided into
three types, depending upon average temperatures:
(a) hot deserts: occur in tropical latitudes
in regions of high pressure where air is sinking
and therefore making rainfall unlikely. See cloud.
(b) temperate deserts: occur in mid-latitudes in areas
of high pressure. They are far inland, so moisture-
bearing winds rarely deposit rainfall in these areas.
(c) cold deserts: occur in the northern latitudes,
again in areas of high pressure. Very low
temperatures throughout the year mean the air is
unable to hold much moisture.
desertifi cation The encroachment of desert
conditions into areas which were once productive.
Desertification can be due partly to climatic
change, i.e. a move towards a drier climate in
some parts of the world (possibly due to global
warming), though human activity has also played
a part through bad farming practices. The problem
is particularly acute along the southern margins
of the Sahara desert in the Sahel region between
Mali and Mauritania in the west, and Ethiopia and
Somalia in the east.
developing countries A collective term for
those nations in Africa, Asia and Latin America
which are undergoing the complex processes of
modernization, industrialization and urbanization.
See also Third World.
dew point The temperature at which the
atmosphere, being cooled, becomes saturated with
water vapour. This vapour is then deposited as
drops of dew.
digitising Translating into a digital format for
computer processing.
dip slope The gentler of the two slopes on either
side of an escarpment crest; the dip slope inclines
in the direction of the dipping strata; the steep
slope in front of the crest is the scarp slope.
discharge The volume of run-off in the channels of
a river basin.
discordant coastline A coastline that is at right
angles to the mountains and valleys immediately
inland. A rise in sea level or a sinking of the land
will cause the valleys to be flooded. A flooded river
valley is known as a ria, whilst a flooded glaciated
valley is known as a fjord. Compare concordant
coastline.
distributary An outlet stream which drains from a
larger river or stream. Often found in a delta area.
Compare tributary.
doldrums An equatorial belt of low atmospheric
pressure where the trade winds converge. Winds
are light and variable but the strong upward
movement of air caused by this convergence
produces frequent thunderstorms and heavy rains.
domain name That part of an internet address
which identifi es a group of computers by country
or institution.
dormitory settlement A village located beyond
the edge of a city but inhabited by residents who
work in that city (see commuter zone).
drainage The removal of water from the land
surface by processes such as streamflow and
infiltration.
drainage basin See river basin.
drift Material transported and deposited by glacial
action on the Earth’s surface. See also boulder clay.
drought A prolonged period where rainfall falls
below the requirement for a region.
dry valley or coombe A feature of limestone and
chalk country, where valleys have been eroded in
dry landscapes.
dune A mound or ridge of drifted sand, occurring
on the sea coast and in deserts.
dyke 1. An artifi cial drainage channel.
2. An artificial bank built to protect low-lying land
from fl ooding.
3. A vertical or semi-vertical igneous intrusion
occurring where a stream of magma has extended
through a line of weakness in the surrounding
rock. See igneous rock.
E
earthquake A movement or tremor of the Earth’s
crust. Earthquakes are associated with plate
boundaries (see plate tectonics) and especially
with subduction zones, where one plate plunges
beneath another. Here the crust is subjected to
tremendous stress. The rocks are forced to bend,
and eventually the stress is so great that the rocks
‘snap’ along a fault line.
eastings The fi rst element of a grid reference. See
northing.
ecology The study of living things, their
interrelationships and their relationships with the
environment.
ecosystem A natural system comprising living
organisms and their environment. The concept
can be applied at the global scale or in the context
of a smaller defined environment. The principle
of the ecosystem is constant: all elements are
intricately linked by flows of energy and nutrients.
El Niño The occasional development of warm ocean
surface waters along the coast of Ecuador and Peru.
Where this warming occurs the tropical Pacific
trade winds weaken and the usual up-welling
of cold, deep ocean water is reduced. El Niño
normally occurs late in the calendar year and lasts
for a few weeks to a few months and can have a
dramatic impact on weather patterns throughout
the world.
emigration The movement of population out of a
given area or country.
employment structure The distribution of the
workforce between the primary, secondary, tertiary
Arcuate delta,
e.g. Nile.
Note bifurcation of
river into
distributaries in delta
Bird’s foot delta,
e.g. Mississippi
Estuarine delta,
e.g. Amazon
sea
land
sea
sea
land
land
delta
depression The development of a depression.
dip slope
discordant coastline
dyke Cross section of eroded dyke, showing how
metamorphic margins, harder than dyke or surrounding
rocks, resist erosion.
ecosystem
and quaternary sectors of the economy. Primary
employment is in agriculture, mining, forestry
and fishing; secondary in manufacturing; tertiary
in the retail, service and administration category;
quaternary in information and expertise.
environment Physical surroundings: soil,
vegetation, wildlife and the atmosphere.
equator The great circle of the Earth with
a latitude of 0º, lying equidistant from the poles.
erosion The wearing away of the Earth’s surface
by running water (rivers and streams), moving ice
(glaciers), the sea and the wind. These are called the
agents of erosion.
erratic A boulder of a certain rock type resting on
a surface of different geology. For example, blocks
of granite resting on a surface of carboniferous
limestone.
escarpment A ridge of high ground as, for
example, the chalk escarpments of southern
England (the Downs and the Chilterns).
esker A low, winding ridge of pebbles and finer
sediment on a glaciated lowland.
estuary The broad mouth of a river where it
enters the sea. An estuary forms where opposite
conditions to those favourable for delta formation
exist: deep water offshore, strong marine currents
and a smaller sediment load.
ethnic group A group of people with a common
identity such as culture, religion or skin colour.
evaporation The process whereby a substance
changes from a liquid to a vapour. Heat from the
sun evaporates water from seas, lakes, rivers, etc.,
and this process produces water vapour in
the atmosphere.
evergreen A vegetation type in which leaves
are continuously present. Compare deciduous
woodland.
exfoliation A form of weathering whereby the
outer layers of a rock or boulder shear off due to
the alternate expansion and contraction produced
by diurnal heating and cooling. Such a process is
especially active in desert regions.
exports Goods and services sold to a foreign
country (compare imports).
extensive farming A system of agriculture in
which relatively small amounts of capital or labour
investment are applied to relatively large areas of
land. For example, sheep ranching is an extensive
form of farming, and yields per unit area are low.
external processes Landscape-forming processes
such as weather and erosion, in contrast to internal
processes.
extreme climate A climate that is characterized
by large ranges of temperature and sometimes
of rainfall. Compare temperate climate, maritime
climate.
F
fault A fracture in the Earth’s crust on either side
of which the rocks have been relatively displaced.
Faulting occurs in response to stress in the Earth’s
crust; the release of this stress in fault movement is
experienced as an earthquake. See also rift valley.
feature class A collection of features with the same
properties, attributes and spatial reference.
fell Upland rough grazing in a hill farming system,
for example in the English Lake District.
fjord A deep, generally straight inlet of the sea along
a glaciated coast. A fjord is a glaciated valley which
has been submerged either by a post-glacial rise in
sea level or a subsidence of the land.
flash flood A sudden increase in river discharge
and overland flow due to a violent rainstorm in the
upper river basin.
flood plain The broad, flat valley floor of the lower
course of a river, levelled by annual flooding and
by the lateral and downstream movement of
meanders.
flow line A diagram showing volumes
of movement, e.g. of people, goods or information
between places. The width of the flow line is
proportional to the amount of movement, for
example in portraying commuter flows into an
urban centre from surrounding towns and villages.
fodder crop A crop grown for animal feed.
fold A bending or buckling of once horizontal rock
strata. Many folds are the result of rocks being
crumpled at plate boundaries (see plate tectonics),
though earthquakes can also cause rocks to fold, as
can igneous intrusions.
fold mountains Mountains which have been
formed by large-scale and complex folding. Studies
of typical fold mountains (the Himalayas, Andes,
Alps and Rockies) indicate that folding has taken
place deep inside the Earth’s crust and upper
mantle as well as in the upper layers of the crust.
fossil fuel Any naturally occurring carbon or
hydrocarbon fuel, notably coal, oil, peat and
natural gas. These fuels have been formed by
decomposed prehistoric organisms.
free trade The movement of goods and services
between countries without any restrictions (such as
quotas, tariffs or taxation) being imposed.
freeze-thaw A type of physical weathering whereby
rocks are denuded by the freezing of water in
cracks and crevices on the rock face. Water expands
on freezing, and this process causes stress and
fracture along any line of weakness in the rock.
Nivation debris accumulates at the bottom of a
rock face as scree.
front A boundary between two air masses. See also
depression.
G
gazetteer A list of place names with their
geographical coordinates.
GDP See Gross Domestic Product.
geosyncline A basin (a large syncline) in which
thick marine sediments have accumulated.
geothermal energy A method of producing
power from heat contained in the lower layers of
the Earth’s crust. New Zealand and Iceland both
use superheated water or steam from geysers
and volcanic springs to heat buildings and for
hothouse cultivation and also to drive steam
turbines to generate electricity. Geothermal energy
is an example of a renewable resource of energy (see
renewable resources, nonrenewable resources).
glaciation A period of cold climate during which
time ice sheets and glaciers are the dominant
forces of denudation.
glacier A body of ice occupying a valley and
originating in a corrie or icefield. A glacier moves
at a rate of several metres per day, the precise
escarpment
exfoliation
fault The main types.
fjord
flood plain
Flow line Commuter flows into a city.
fold
speed depending upon climatic and topographic
conditions in the area in question.
global warming or greenhouse effect
The warming of the Earth’s atmosphere caused
by an excess of carbon dioxide,which acts like a
blanket, preventing the natural escape of heat.
This situation has been developing over the last
150 years because of (a) the burning of fossil fuels,
which releases vast amounts of carbon dioxide
into the atmosphere, and (b) deforestation, which
results in fewer trees being available to take up
carbon dioxide (see photosynthesis).
globalization The process that enables financial
markets and companies to operate internationally
(as a result of deregulation and improved
communications). Transnational corporations
now locate their manufacturing in places that best
serve their global market at the lowest cost.
GNI (gross national income) formerly GNP
(gross national product) The total value of the
goods and services produced annually by a nation,
plus net property income from abroad.
Gondwanaland The southern-hemisphere
super-continent, consisting of the present South
America, Africa, India, Australasia and Antarctica,
which split from Pangaea c.200 million years ago.
Gondwanaland is part of the theory of continental
drift. See also plate tectonics.
GPS (global positioning system) A system of
earth-orbiting satellites, transmitting signals
continuously towards earth, which enable the
position of a receiving device on the earth’s surface
to be accurately estimated from the difference in
arrival of the signals.
gradient 1. The measure of steepness of a line or
slope. In mapwork, the average gradient between
two points can be calculated as:
diff erence in altitude
distance apart
2. The measure of change in a property such as
density. In human geography gradients are found
in, for example, population density, land values
and settlement ranking.
granite An igneous rock having large crystals due to
slow cooling at depth in the Earth’s crust.
green belt An area of land, usually around the
outskirts of a town or city on which building and
other developments are restricted by legislation.
greenfield site A development site for industry,
retailing or housing that has previously been used
only for agriculture or recreation. Such sites are
frequently in the green belt.
greenhouse effect See global warming.
Greenwich Meridian See prime meridian.
grid reference A method for specifying position
on a map. See eastings and northings.
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) The total value
of all goods and services produced domestically
by a nation during a year. It is equivalent to
Gross National Income (GNI) minus investment
incomes from foreign nations.
groundwater Water held in the bedrock of a
region, having percolated through the soil from
the surface. Such water is an important resource in
areas where surface run-off is limited or absent.
groyne See breakwater.
gryke An enlarged joint between blocks of limestone
(clints), especially in a limestone pavement.
gulf A large coastal indentation, similar to a bay but
larger in extent. Commonly formed as a result of
rising sea levels.
H
habitat A preferred location for particular species
of plants and animals to live and reproduce.
hanging valley A tributary valley entering a main
valley at a much higher level because of deepening
of the main valley, especially by glacial erosion.
HDI (human development index)
A measurement of a country’s achievements in
three areas: longevity, knowledge and standard of
living. Longevity is measured by life expectancy at
birth; knowledge is measured by a combination
of the adult literacy rate and the combined gross
primary, secondary and tertiary school enrolment
ratio; standard of living is measured by GDP per
capita.
headland A promontory of resistant rock along the
coastline. See bay.
hemisphere Any half of a globe or sphere.
The earth has traditionally been divided into
hemispheres by the equator (northern and
southern hemispheres) and by the prime
meridian and International Date Line (eastern
and western hemispheres).
hill farming A system of agriculture where sheep
(and to a lesser extent cattle) are grazed on upland
rough pasture.
hill shading Shadows drawn on a map to create a
3-dimensional effect and a sense of visual relief.
histogram A graph for showing values of classed
data as the areas of bars.
horizon The distinct layers found in the soil
profi le. Usually three horizons are identified – A, B
and C, as in the diagram.
horst See block mountain.
horticulture The growing of plants and flowers for
commercial sale. It is now an international trade,
for example, orchids are grown in Southeast Asia
for sale in Europe.
human geography The study of people and their
activities in terms of patterns and processes of
population, settlement, economic activity and
communications. Compare physical geography.
hunter/gatherer economy A pre-agricultural
phase of development in which people survive
by hunting and gathering the animal and plant
resources of the natural environment. No
cultivation or herding is involved.
hurricane, cyclone or typhoon A wind of force
12 on the Beaufort wind scale, i.e. one having a
velocity of more than 118 km per hour. Hurricanes
can cause great damage by wind as well as from the
storm waves and floods that accompany them.
hydraulic action The erosive force of water alone,
as distinct from corrasion. A river or the sea will
erode partially by the sheer force of moving water
and this is termed ‘hydraulic action’.
hydroelectric power The generation of
electricity by turbines driven by flowing water.
Hydroelectricity is most efficiently generated
in rugged topography where a head of water can
most easily be created, or on a large river where a
dam can create similar conditions. Whatever the
location, the principle remains the same – that
water descending via conduits from an upper
storage area passes through turbines and thus
creates electricity.
hydrological cycle The cycling of water through
sea, land and atmosphere.
hydrosphere All the water on Earth, including that
present in the atmosphere as well as in oceans,
seas, ice sheets, etc.
hygrometer An instrument for measuring the
relative humidity of the atmosphere. It comprises
two thermometers, one of which is kept moist by
a wick inserted in a water reservoir. Evaporation
from the wick reduces the temperature of the ‘wet
bulb’ thermometer, and the difference between
the dry and the wet bulb temperatures is used to
calculate relative humidity from standard tables.
hanging valley
grid reference
4000
4000 6000
6001 8000
8001
10 000
10 000
histogram
horizon A typical soil profile.
hydrological cycle
I
Ice Age A period of glaciation in which a cooling of
climate leads to the development of ice sheets, ice
caps and valley glaciers.
ice cap A covering of permanent ice over a relatively
small land mass, e.g. Iceland.
ice sheet A covering of permanent ice over a
substantial continental area such as Antarctica.
iceberg A large mass of ice which has broken off an
ice sheet or glacier and left fl oating in the sea.
ID (Identifier) A unique value given to a particular
object.
igneous rock A rock which originated as magma
(molten rock) at depth in or below the Earth’s crust.
Igneous rocks are generally classified according to
crystal size, colour and mineral composition. See
also plutonic rock.
immigration The movement of people into a
country or region from other countries or regions.
impermeable rock A rock that is non-porous
and therefore incapable of taking in water or of
allowing it to pass through between the grains.
Compare impervious rock. See also permeable rock.
impervious rock A non-porous rock with no
cracks or fissures through which water might pass.
imports Goods or services bought into one country
from another (compare exports).
industrialization The development of industry on
an extensive scale.
infi ltration The gradual movement of water into
the ground.
infrastructure The basic structure of an
organization or system. The infrastructure of a
city includes, for example, its roads and railways,
schools, factories, power and water supplies.
inner city The ring of buildings around the Central
Business District (CBD) of a town or city.
intensive farming A system of agriculture where
relatively large amounts of capital and/or labour
are invested on relatively small areas of land.
interglacial A warm period between two periods
of glaciation and cold climate. The present
interglacial began about 10,000 years ago.
interlocking spurs Obstacles of hard rock round
which a river twists and turns in a V-shaped valley.
Erosion is pronounced on the concave banks, and
this ultimately causes the development of spurs
which alternate on either side of the river and
interlock as shown in the diagram.
International Date Line An imaginary line which
approximately follows 180° longitude.The area of
the world just east of the line is one day ahead of
the area just west of the line.
international trade The exchange of goods and
services between countries.
intrusion A body of igneous rock injected into the
Earth’s crust from the mantle below. See dyke, sill,
batholith.
ionosphere See atmosphere.
irrigation A system of artificial watering of the land
in order to grow crops. Irrigation is particularly
important in areas of low or unreliable rainfall.
island A mass of land, smaller than a continent,
which is completely surrounded by water.
isobar A line joining points of equal atmospheric
pressure, as on the meteorological map below.
isohyet A line on a meteorological map joining
places of equal rainfall.
isotherm A line on a meteorological map joining
places of equal temperature.
J
joint A vertical or semi-vertical fissure in a
sedimentary rock, contrasted with roughly
horizontal bedding planes. In igneous rocks
jointing may occur as a result of contraction on
cooling from the molten state. Joints should
be distinguished from faults in that they are on
a much smaller scale and there is no relative
displacement of the rocks on either side of the
joint. Joints, being lines of weakness are exploited
by weathering.
K
kame A short ridge of sand and gravel deposited
from the water of a melted glacier.
karst topography An area of limestone scenery
where drainage is predominantly subterranean.
kettle hole A small depression or hollow in a
glacial outwash plain, formed when a block of ice
embedded in the outwash deposits eventually
melts, causing the sediment above to subside.
L
laccolith An igneous intrusion, domed and often of
considerable dimensions, caused where a body of
viscous magma has been intruded into the strata of
the Earth’s crust. These strata are buckled upwards
over the laccolith.
lagoon 1. An area of sheltered coastal water behind
a bay bar or tombolo.
2. The calm water behind a coral reef.
lahar A landslide of volcanic debris mixed with
water down the sides of a volcano, caused either by
heavy rain or the heat of the volcano melting snow
and ice.
lake A body of water completely surrounded by land.
land tenure A system of land ownership or
allocation.
land use The function of an area of land. For
example, the land use in rural areas could be
farming or forestry, whereas urban land use could
be housing or industry.
landform Any natural feature of the Earth’s
surface, such as mountains or valleys.
laterite A hard (literally ‘brick-like’) soil in tropical
regions caused by the baking of the upper
horizons by exposure to the sun.
latitude Distance north or south of the equator,
as measured by degrees of the angle at the Earth’s
centre:
Laurasia The northern hemisphere
supercontinent, consisting of the present North
America, Europe and Asia (excluding India), which
split from Pangaea c. 200 million years ago. Laurasia
is part of the theory of continental drift. See also
plate tectonics.
lava Magma extruded onto the Earth’s surface via
some form of volcanic eruption. Lava varies in
viscosity (see viscous lava), colour and chemical
composition. Acidic lavas tend to be viscous and
flow slowly; basic lavas tend to be nonviscous and
flow quickly. Commonly, lava fl ows comprise
basaltic material, as for example in the process of
sea-fl oor spreading (see plate tectonics).
lava flow A stream of lava issuing from some form
of volcanic eruption. See also viscous lava.
lava plateau A relatively flat upland composed of
layer upon layer of approximately horizontally
bedded lavas. An example of this is the Deccan
Plateau of India.
leaching The process by which soluble substances
such as mineral salts are washed out of the upper
soil layer into the lower layer by rain water.
levée The bank of a river, raised above the general
level of the flood plain by sediment deposition
during flooding. When the river bursts its banks,
relatively coarse sediment is deposited first, and
recurrent flooding builds up the river’s banks
accordingly. See diagram overleaf.
lignite A soft form of coal, harder than peat but
softer than bituminous coal.
igneous rock
interlocking spurs A V-shaped valley with interlocking spurs.
isobar
laccolith
lagoon
latitude
limestone Calcium-rich sedimentary rock formed
by the accumulation of the skeletal matter of
marine organisms.
limestone pavement An exposed limestone
surface on which the joints have been enlarged by
the action of rainwater dissolving the limestone
to form weak carbonic acid. These enlarged joints,
or grykes, separate roughly rectangular blocks of
limestone called clints.
location The position of population, settlement
and economic activity in an area or areas. Location
is a basic theme in human geography.
loess A very fi ne silt deposit, often of considerable
thickness, transported by the wind prior to
deposition. When irrigated, loess can be very fertile
and, consequently, high yields can be obtained
from crops grown on loess deposits.
longitude A measure of distance on the Earth’s surface
east or west of the Greenwich Meridian, an imaginary
line running from pole to pole through Greenwich
in London. Longitude, like latitude, is measured in
degrees of an angle taken from the centre of the Earth.
The precise location of a place can be given by a
grid reference comprising longitude and latitude.
See also map projection, prime meridian.
longshore drift The net movement of material
along a beach due to the oblique approach of waves
to the shore. Beach deposits move in a zig-zag
fashion, as shown in the diagram. Longshore drift
is especially active on long, straight coastlines.
As waves approach, sand is carried up the beach
by the swash, and retreats back down the beach
with the backwash. Thus a single representative
grain of sand will migrate in the pattern A, B, C, D,
E, F in the diagram.
M
magma Molten rock originating in the Earth’s
mantle; it is the source of all igneous rocks.
malnutrition The condition of being poorly
nourished, as contrasted with undernutrition,
which is lack of a sufficient quantity of food. The
diet of a malnourished person may be high in
starchy foods but is invariably low in protein and
essential minerals and vitamins.
mantle The largest of the concentric zones of
the Earth’s structure, overlying the core and
surrounded in turn by the crust.
manufacturing industry The making of articles
using physical labour or machinery, especially on a
large scale. See secondary sector.
map Diagrammatic representation of an area – for
example part of the earth’s surface.
map projection A method by which the curved
surface of the Earth is shown on a flat surface map.
As it is not possible to show all the Earth’s features
accurately on a flat surface, some projections aim
to show direction accurately at the expense of
area, some the shape of the land and oceans, while
others show correct area at the expense of accurate
shape.
One of the projections most commonly used is
the Mercator projection, devised in 1569, in which all
lines of latitude are the same length as the equator.
This results in increased distortion of area,
moving from the equator towards the poles. This
projection is suitable for navigation charts.
The Mollweide projection shows the land masses
the correct size in relation to each other but there
is distortion of shape. As the Mollweide projection
has no area distortion it is useful for showing
distributions such as population distribution.
The only true representation of the Earth’s
surface is a globe.
marble A whitish, crystalline metamorphic rock
produced when limestone is subjected to great heat
or pressure (or both) during Earth movements.
maritime climate A temperate climate that is
affected by the closeness of the sea, giving a small
annual range of temperatures – a coolish summer
and a mild winter – and rainfall throughout the
year. Britain has a maritime climate. Compare
extreme climate.
market gardening An intensive type of agriculture
traditionally located on the margins of urban areas
to supply fresh produce on a daily basis to the
city population. Typical market-garden produce
includes salad crops, such as tomatoes, lettuce,
cucumber, etc., cut flowers, fruit and some green
vegetables.
mask A method of hiding features on a map to
improve legibility.
maximum and minimum thermometer An
instrument for recording the highest and lowest
temperatures over a 24-hour period.
meander A large bend, especially in the middle
or lower stages of a river’s course. See fl ood plain.
A meander is the result of lateral corrasion,
which becomes dominant over vertical corrasion
as the gradient of the river’s course decreases.
The characteristic features of a meander are
summarized in the diagrams below.
See also oxbow lake.
mesa A fl at-topped, isolated hill in arid regions. A
limestone
limestone pavement
longitude A grid showing the location of Lagos, Nigeria.
longshore drift
mantle
levée
map projection Mollweide projection.
map projection Mercator projection.
maximum and minimum thermometer
meander A river meander.
meander Fully formed meanders.
mesa has a protective cap of hard rock underlain
by softer, more readily eroded sedimentary rock. A
butte is a relatively small outlier of a mesa.
mesosphere See atmosphere.
metadata All Information used to describe content,
quality, condition, origin and other characteristics
of data.
metamorphic rock A rock which has been
changed by intensive heat or pressure.
Metamorphism implies an increase in hardness
and resistance to erosion. Shale, for example,
may be metamorphosed by pressure into slate;
sandstone by heat into quartzite, limestone into
marble. Metamorphism of pre-existing rocks is
associated with the processes of folding, faulting
and vulcanicity.
migration A permanent or semipermanent change
of residence.
monoculture The growing of a single crop.
monsoon The term strictly means ‘seasonal wind’
and is used generally to describe a situation where
there is a reversal of wind direction from one
season to another. This is especially the case in
South and Southeast Asia, where two monsoon
winds occur, both related to the extreme pressure
gradients created by the large land mass of the
Asian continent.
moraine A collective term for debris deposited on
or by glaciers and ice bodies in general. Several
types of moraine are recognized: lateral moraine
forms along the edges of a valley glacier where
debris eroded from the valley sides, or weathered
from the slopes above the glacier, collects; medial
moraine forms where two lateral moraines meet
at a glacier junction; englacial moraine is material
which is trapped within the body of the glacier; and
ground moraine is material eroded from the floor
of the valley and used by the glacier as an abrasive
tool. A terminal moraine is material bulldozed
by the glacier during its advance and deposited
at its maximum down-valley extent. Recessional
moraines may be deposited at standstills during a
period of general glacial retreat.
mortlake See oxbow lake.
mountain A natural upward projection of the
Earth’s surface, higher and steeper than a hill, and
often having a rocky summit.
N
national park An area of scenic countryside
protected by law from uncontrolled development.
A national park has two main functions:
(a) to conserve the natural beauty of the landscape;
(b) to enable the public to visit and enjoy the
countryside for leisure and recreation.
natural hazard A natural event which, in extreme
cases, can lead to loss of life and destruction
of property. Some natural hazards result from
geological events, such as earthquakes and the
eruption of volcanoes, whilst others are due to
weather events such as hurricanes, fl oods and
droughts.
natural increase The increase in population due to
the difference between birth rate and death rate.
neap tides See tides.
névé Compact snow. In a corrie icefield, for
example, four layers are recognized: blue and white
ice at the bottom of the ice mass; névé overlying the
ice and powder snow on the surface.
new town A new urban location created
(a) to provide overspill accommodation for a large
city or conurbation;
(b) to provide a new focus for industrial
development.
newly industralized country (NIC)
A developing country which is becoming
industrialized, for example Malaysia and Thailand.
Some NICs have successfully used large-scale
development to move into the industrialized
world. Usually the capital for such developments
comes from outside the country.
nivation The process of weathering by snow and
ice, particularly through freeze-thaw action.
Particularly active in cold climates and high
altitudes – for example on exposed slopes above a
glacier.
node A point representing the beginning or ending
point of an edge or arc.
nomadic pastoralism A system of agriculture in
dry grassland regions. People and stock (cattle,
sheep, goats) are continually moving in search
of pasture and water. The pastoralists subsist on
meat, milk and other animal products.
non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) Independent organizations, such as
charities (Oxfam, Water Aid) which provide aid and
expertise to economically developing countries.
nonrenewable resources Resources of which
there is a fixed supply, which will eventually be
exhausted. Examples of these are metal ores and
fossil fuels. Compare renewable resources.
North and South A way of dividing the
industrialized nations, found predominantly
in the North from those less developed nations
in the South. The gap which exists between the
rich ‘North’ and the poor ‘South’ is called the
development gap.
northings The second element of a grid reference.
See eastings.
nuclear power station An electricity-generating
plant using nuclear fuel as an alternative to the
conventional fossil fuels of coal, oil and gas.
nuée ardente A very hot and fast-moving cloud
of gas, ash and rock that flows close to the ground
after a violent ejection from a volcano. It is very
destructive.
nunatak A mountain peak projecting above the
general level of the ice near the edge of an ice sheet.
nutrient cycle The cycling of nutrients through
the environment.
O
ocean A large area of sea. The world’s oceans are the
Pacific, Atlantic, Indian and Arctic. The Southern
Ocean is made up of the areas of the Pacific,
Atlantic and Indian Oceans south of latitude 60ºS.
ocean current A movement of the surface water of
an ocean.
opencast mining A type of mining where the
mineral is extracted by direct excavation rather
than by shaft or drift methods.
organic farming A system of farming that avoids
the use of any artificial fertilizers or chemical
pesticides, using only organic fertilizers and
pesticides derived directly from animal or
vegetable matter. Yields from organic farming
are lower, but the products are sold at a premium
price.
overfold See fold.
oxbow lake, mortlake or cut-off
A crescent-shaped lake originating in a meander
that was abandoned when erosion breached the
neck between bends, allowing the stream to flow
straight on, bypassing the meander. The ends
of the meander rapidly silt up and it becomes
separated from the river.
ozone A form of oxygen found in a layer
in the stratosphere, where it protects the Earth’s
surface from ultraviolet rays.
P
Pangaea The supercontinent or universal
land mass in which all continents were joined
together approximately 200 million years ago. See
continental drift.
passage See strait.
pastoral farming A system of farming in which the
raising of livestock is the dominant element. See also
nomadic pastoralism.
peasant agriculture The growing of crops or
raising of animals, partly for subsistence needs and
partly for market sale. Peasant agriculture is thus
an intermediate stage between subsistence and
commercial farming.
peat Partially decayed and compressed vegetative
mesa
moraine
opencast mining
oxbow lake
matter accumulating in areas of high rainfall and/
or poor drainage.
peneplain A region that has been eroded until it is
almost level. The more resistant rocks will stand
above the general level of the land.
per capita income The GNI (gross national
income) of a country divided by the size of its
population. It gives the average income per head
of the population if the national income were
shared out equally. Per capita income comparisons
are used as one indicator of levels of economic
development.
periglacial features A periglacial landscape is
one which has not been glaciated per se, but which
has been affected by the severe climate prevailing
around the ice margin.
permafrost The permanently frozen subsoil that is
a feature of areas of tundra.
permeable rock Rock through which water can
pass via a network of pores between the grains.
Compare pervious rock. See also impermeable rock.
pervious rock Rock which, even if non-porous,
can allow water to pass through via interconnected
joints, bedding planes and fissures. An example
is limestone. Compare permeable rock. See also
impervious rock.
photosynthesis The process by which green plants
make carbohydrates from carbon dioxide and
water, and give off oxygen. Photosynthesis balances
respiration.
physical feature See topography.
physical geography The study of our environment,
comprising such elements as geomorphology,
hydrology, pedology, meteorology, climatology and
biogeography.
pie chart A circular graph for displaying values as
proportions:
plain A level or almost level area of land.
plantation agriculture A system of agriculture
located in a tropical or semi-tropical environment,
producing commodities for export to Europe,
North America and other industrialized regions.
Coff ee, tea, bananas, rubber and sisal are examples
of plantation crops.
plateau An upland area with a fairly flat surface and
steep slopes. Rivers often dissect plateau surfaces.
plate tectonics The theory that the Earth’s crust is
divided into seven large, rigid plates, and several
smaller ones, which are moving relative to each
other over the upper layers of the Earth’s mantle.
See continental drift. Earthquakes and volcanic
activity occur at the boundaries between the plates.
plucking A process of glacial erosion whereby,
during the passage of a valley glacier or other ice
body, ice forming in cracks and fissures drags out
material from a rock face. This is particularly the
case with the backwall of a corrie.
plug The solidified material which seals the vent of
a volcano after an eruption.
plutonic rock Igneous rock formed at depth in
the Earth’s crust; its crystals are large due to the
slow rate of cooling. Granite, such as is found in
batholiths and other deep-seated intrusions, is a
common example.
podzol The characteristic soil of the taiga
coniferous forests of Canada and northern Russia.
Podzols are leached, greyish soils: iron and lime
especially are leached out of the upper horizons, to
be deposited as hardpan in the B horizon.
pollution Environmental damage caused by
improper management of resources, or by careless
human activity.
polygons Closed shapes defined by a connected
sequences of coordinate pairs, where the first and
last coordinate pair are the same.
polyline A series of connected segments which
form a path to define a shape.
population change The increase of a population,
the components of which are summarized in the
following diagram.
population density The number of people
per unit area. Population densities are usually
expressed per square kilometre.
population distribution The pattern of
population location at a given scale.
population explosion On a global scale, the dramatic
increase in population during the 20th century.
The graph below shows world population growth.
population growth An increase in the population
of a given region. This may be the result of
natural increase (more births than deaths) or of
in-migration, or both.
population pyramid A type of bar graph used to
show population structure, i.e. the age and sex
composition of the population for a given region
or nation.
pothole 1. A deep hole in limestone, caused by
the enlargement of a joint through the dissolving
effect of rainwater.
2. A hollow scoured in a river bed by the swirling of
pebbles and small boulders in eddies.
precipitation Water deposited on the Earth’s surface
in the form of e.g. rain, snow, sleet, hail and dew.
prevailing wind The dominant wind direction of a
region. Prevailing winds are named by the direction
from which they blow.
primary keys A set of properties in a database that
uniquely identifies each record.
permeable rock (a) Permeable rock, (b) impermeable rock,
(c) pervious rock.
The journey to work: mode of transport.
(Sample of urban population)
Mode No. % Sectoro (% x 3.6)
Foot 25 3.2 11.5
Cycle 10 1.3 4.7
Bus 86 11.1 40.0
Train 123 15.9 57.2
Car 530 68.5 246.6
Total 774 100 360
per cent degrees
pie chart
a) Constructive plate boundary
b) Destructive plate boundary
plate tectonics
population change
BR= birth rate DR= death rate
population explosion
a) population pyramid Pyramid for India, showing high
birth rates and death rates.
b) population pyramid Pyramid for England and Wales,
showing low birth and death rates.
primary sector That sector of the national
economy which deals with the production of
primary materials: agriculture, mining, forestry
and fishing. Primary products such as these have
had no processing or manufacturing involvement.
The total economy comprises the primary sector,
the secondary sector, the tertiary sector and the
quaternary sector.
primary source See secondary source.
prime meridian or Greenwich Meridian
The line of 0° longitude passing through
Greenwich in London.
pumped storage Water pumped back up to the
storage lake of a hydroelectric power station, using
surplus ‘off-peak’ electricity.
pyramidal peak A pointed mountain summit
resulting from the headward extension of corries
and arêtes. Under glacial conditions a given
summit may develop corries on all sides, especially
those facing north and east. As these erode into
the summit, a formerly rounded profile may be
changed into a pointed, steep-sided peak.
pyroclasts Rocky debris emitted during a volcanic
eruption, usually following a previous emission
of gases and prior to the outpouring of lava –
although many eruptions do not reach the final
lava stage.
Q
quality of life The level of wellbeing of
a community and of the area in which the
community lives.
quartz One of the commonest minerals
found in the Earth’s crust, and a form of silica
(silicon+oxide). Most sandstones are composed
predominantly of quartz.
quartzite A very hard and resistant rock formed by
the metamorphism of sandstone.
quaternary sector That sector of the economy
providing information and expertise. This
includes the microchip and microelectronics
industries. Highly developed economies are
seeing an increasing number of their workforce
employed in this sector. Compare primary sector,
secondary sector, tertiary sector.
query A request to select features or records from a
database.
R
rain guage An instrument used to measure rainfall.
Rain passes through a funnel into the jar below and
is then transferred to a measuring cylinder. The
reading is in millimetres and indicates the depth
of rain which has fallen over an area. See diagram.
raised beach See wave-cut platform.
range A long series or chain of mountains.
rapids An area of broken, turbulent water in a
river channel, caused by a stratum of resistant
rock that dips downstream. The softer rock
immediately upstream and downstream erodes
more quickly, leaving the resistant rock sticking
up, obstructing the flow of the water. Compare
waterfall.
raster A pattern of closely spaced rows of dots that
form an image.
raw materials The resources supplied to industries
for subsequent manufacturing processes.
reef A ridge of rock, sand or coral whose top lies
close to the sea’s surface.
regeneration Renewed growth of, for example,
forest after felling. Forest regeneration is crucial to
the long-term stability of many resource systems,
from bush fallowing to commercial forestry.
region An area of land which has marked
boundaries or unifying internal characteristics.
Geographers may identify regions according to
physical, climatic, political, economic or other
factors.
rejuvenation Renewed vertical corrasion by rivers
in their middle and lower courses, caused by a fall
in sea level, or a rise in the level of land relative to
the sea.
relative humidity The relationship between the
actual amount of water vapour in the air and
the amount of vapour the air could hold at a
particular temperature. This is usually expressed
as a percentage. Relative humidity gives a measure
of dampness in the atmosphere, and this can be
determined by a hygrometer.
relief The differences in height between any parts
of the Earth’s surface. Hence a relief map will aim
to show differences in the height of land by, for
example, contour lines or by a colour key.
remote sensing The gathering of information by
the use of electronic or other sensing devices in
satellites.
renewable resources Resources that can be used
repeatedly, given appropriate management and
conservation. Compare non-renewable resources.
representative fraction The fraction of real
size to which objects are reduced on a map; for
example, on a 1:50 000 map, any object is shown at
1/50 000 of its real size.
reserves Resources which are available for future
use.
reservoir A natural or artificial lake used for
collecting or storing water, especially for water
supply or irrigation.
resolution The smallest allowable separation
between two coordinate values in a feature class.
resource Any aspect of the human and physical
environments which people find useful in
satisfying their needs.
respiration The release of energy from food in
the cells of all living organisms (plants as well as
animals). The process normally requires oxygen
and releases carbon dioxide. It is balanced by
photosynthesis.
revolution The passage of the Earth around the
sun; one revolution is completed in 365.25 days.
Due to the tilt of the Earth’s axis (231–2° from the
vertical), revolution results in the sequence of
seasons experienced on the Earth’s surface.
ria A submerged river valley, caused by a rise in sea
level or a subsidence of the land relative to the sea.
ribbon lake A long, relatively narrow lake, usually
occupying the floor of a U-shaped glaciated valley.
A ribbon lake may be caused by the overdeepening of
a section of the valley floor by glacial abrasion.
Richter scale A scale of earthquake measurement
that describes the magnitude of an earthquake
according to the amount of energy released, as
recorded by seismographs.
rift valley A section of the Earth’s crust which has
been downfaulted. The faults bordering the rift
valley are approximately parallel. There are two
main theories related to the origin of rift valleys.
The first states that tensional forces within the
Earth’s crust have caused a block of land to sink
between parallel faults. The second theory states
that compression within the Earth’s crust has
caused faulting in which two side blocks have risen
up towards each other over a central block.
The most complex rift valley system in the world
is that ranging from Syria in the Middle East to the
river Zambezi in East Africa.
river A large natural stream of fresh water flowing
along a definite course, usually into the sea.
pyramidal peak
rain gauge
rapids
revolution The seasons of the year.
ria
rift valley
river basin The area drained by a river and its
tributaries, sometimes referred to as a catchment
area.
river cliff or bluff The outer bank of a meander.
The cliff is kept steep by undercutting since river
erosion is concentrated on the outer bank.
See meander and river’s course.
river’s course The route taken by a river from its
source to the sea. There are three major sections:
the upper course, the middle course and the lower
course.
river terrace A platform of land beside a river.
This is produced when a river is rejuvenated in its
middle or lower courses. The river cuts down into
its flood plain, which then stands above the new
general level of the river as paired terraces.
roche moutonnée An outcrop of resistant rock
sculpted by the passage of a glacier.
rock The solid material of the Earth’s crust. See
igneous rock, sedimentary rock, metamorphic
rock.
rotation The movement of the Earth about its
own axis. One rotation is completed in 24 hours.
Due to the tilt of the Earth’s axis, the length of day
and night varies at different points on the Earth’s
surface. Days become longer with increasing
latitude north; shorter with increasing latitude
south. The situation is reversed during the
northern midwinter (= the southern midsummer).
See diagram.
rural depopulation The loss of population from
the countryside as people move away from rural
areas towards cities and conurbations.
rural–urban migration The movement of people
from rural to urban areas. See migration and rural
depopulation.
S
saltpan A shallow basin, usually in a desert region,
containing salt which has been deposited from an
evaporated salt lake.
sandstone A common sedimentary rock deposited
by either wind or water. Sandstones vary in texture
from fine- to coarse- grained, but are invariably
composed of grains of quartz, cemented by such
substances as calcium carbonate or silica.
satellite image An image giving information about
an area of the Earth or another planet, obtained
from a satellite. Instruments on an Earth-orbiting
satellite, such as Landsat, continually scan the
Earth and sense the brightness of reflected light.
When the information is sent back to Earth,
computers turn it into false-colour images in which
built-up areas appear in one colour (perhaps blue),
vegetation in another (often red), bare ground in a
third, and water in a fourth colour, making it easy to
see their distribution and to monitor any changes.
Compare aerial photograph.
savanna The grassland regions of Africa which lie
between the tropical rainforest and the hot deserts.
In South America, the Llanos and Campos regions
are representative of the savanna type.
scale The size ratio represented by a map; for
example, on a map of scale 1:25 000, the real
landscape is portrayed at 1/25 000 of its actual size.
scarp slope The steeper of the two slopes which
comprise an escarpment of inclined strata.
Compare dip slope.
science park A site accommodating several
companies involved in scientific work or research.
Science parks are linked to universities and tend to
be located on greenfi eld and/or landscaped sites.
Compare business park.
scree or talus The accumulated weathering debris
below a crag or other exposed rock face. Larger
boulders will accumulate at the base of the scree,
carried there by greater momentum.
sea level The average height of the surface of the
oceans and seas.
secondary sector The sector of the economy
which comprises manufacturing and processing
industries, in contrast with the primary sector
which produces raw materials, the tertiary sector
which provides services, and the quaternary sector
which provides information.
secondary source A supply of information or
data that has been researched or collected by an
individual or group of people and made available
for others to use; census data is an example of
this. A primary source of data or information is
one collected at first hand by the researcher who
needs it; for example, a traffic count in an area,
undertaken by a student for his or her own project.
sediment The material resulting from the
weathering and erosion of the landscape, which
has been deposited by water, ice or wind. It may be
reconsolidated to form sedimentary rock.
sedimentary rock A rock which has been formed
by the consolidation of sediment derived from pre-
existing rocks. Sandstone is a common example
of a rock formed in this way. Chalk and limestone
are other types of sedimentary rock, derived from
organic and chemical precipitations.
seif dune A linear sand dune, the ridge of sand
lying parallel to the prevailing wind direction. The
eddying movement of the wind keeps the sides of
the dune steep.
seismograph An instrument which measures and
records the seismic waves which travel through the
Earth during an earthquake.
seismology The study of earthquakes.
serac A pinnacle of ice formed by the tumbling and
shearing of a glacier at an ice fall, i.e. the broken ice
associated with a change in gradient of the valley
floor.
service industry The people and organizations
that provide a service to the public.
river basin
river’s course Upper course.
river’s course Lower course.
river terrace Paired river terraces above a flood plain.
roche moutonnée
rotation The tilt of the Earth at the northern summer and
southern winter solstice.
savanna The position of the savanna in West Africa.
scarp slope
scree or talus
seif dunes
seismograph A typical seismograph trace.
settlement Any location chosen by people as a
permanent or semi-permanent dwelling place.
shading map or choropleth map A map in which
shading of varying intensity is used. For example,
the pattern of population densities in a region.
shanty town An area of unplanned, random, urban
development often around the edge of a city. The
shanty town is a major element of the structure of
many Third World cities such as São Paulo, Mexico
City, Nairobi, Kolkata and Lagos. The shanty
town is characterized by high-density/low-quality
dwellings, often constructed from the simplest
materials such as scrap wood, corrugated iron
and plastic sheeting – and by the lack of standard
services such as sewerage and water supply, power
supplies and refuse collection.
shape fi les A storage format for storing the location,
shape and attributes of geographic features.
shifting cultivation See bush fallowing.
shoreface terrace A bank of sediment
accumulating at the change of slope which marks
the limit of a marine wave-cut platform.
Material removed from the retreating cliff base
is transported by the undertow off the wave-cut
platform to be deposited in deeper water offshore.
silage Any fodder crop harvested whilst still green.
The crop is kept succulent by partial fermentation
in a silo. It is used as animal feed during the winter.
sill 1. An igneous intrusion of roughly horizontal
disposition. See igneous rock.
2. (Also called threshold) the lip of a corrie.
silt Fine sediment, the component particles of
which have a mean diameter of between 0.002 mm
and 0.02 mm.
sinkhole See pothole.
slash and burn See tropical rainforest.
slate Metamorphosed shale or clay. Slate is a
dense, fi ne-grained rock distinguished by the
characteristic of perfect cleavage, i.e. it can be split
along a perfectly smooth plane.
slip The amount of vertical displacement
of strata at a fault.
smog A mixture of smoke and fog associated
with urban and industrial areas, that creates an
unhealthy atmosphere.
snow line The altitude above which permanent
snow exists, and below which any snow that falls
will not persist during the summer months.
socioeconomic group A group defined by
particular social and economic characteristics,
such as educational qualifications, type of job, and
earnings.
soil The loose material which forms the uppermost
layer of the Earth’s surface, composed of the
inorganic fraction, i.e. material derived from the
weathering of bedrock, and the organic fraction –
that is material derived from the decay of vegetable
matter.
soil erosion The accelerated breakdown and removal
of soil due to poor management. Soil erosion is
particularly a problem in harsh environments.
soil profile The sequence of layers or horizons
usually seen in an exposed soil section.
solar power Heat radiation from the sun converted
into electricity or used directly to provide heating.
Solar power is an example of a renewable source of
energy (see renewable resources).
solifluction A process whereby thawed surface
soil creeps downslope over a permanently frozen
subsoil (permafrost).
spatial distribution The pattern of locations of, for
example, population or settlement in a region.
spit A low, narrow bank of sand and shingle built
out into an estuary by the process of longshore
drift.
spring The emergence of an underground
stream at the surface, often occurring where
impermeable rock underlies permeable rock or
pervious rock or strata.
spring tides See tides.
squatter settlement An area of peripheral urban
settlement in which the residents occupy land to
which they have no legal title. See shanty town.
stack A coastal feature resulting from the collapse
of a natural arch. The stack remains after less
resistant strata have been worn away by weathering
and marine erosion.
stalactite A column of calcium carbonate hanging
from the roof of a limestone cavern. As water
passes through the limestone it dissolves a
certain proportion, which is then precipitated by
evaporation of water droplets dripping from the
cavern roof. The drops splashing on the floor of
a cavern further evaporate to precipitate more
calcium carbonate as a stalagmite.
stalagmite A column of calcium carbonate growing
upwards from a cavern floor. Compare stalactite.
Stalactites and stalagmites may meet, forming a
column or pillar.
staple diet The basic foodstuff which comprises
the daily meals of a given people.
stereoplotter An instrument used for projecting
an aerial photograph and converting locations of
objects on the image to x-, y-, and z-coordinates. It
plots these coordinates as a map.
Stevenson’s screen A shelter used in weather
stations, in which thermometers and other
instruments may be hung.
strait, channel or passage A narrow body of water,
between two land masses, which links two larger
bodies of water.
strata Layers of rock superimposed one upon the
other.
stratosphere The layer of the atmosphere which
lies immediately above the troposphere and
below the mesosphere and ionosphere. Within
the stratosphere, temperature increases with
altitutude.
stratus Layer-cloud of uniform grey appearance,
often associated with the warm sector of a
depression. Stratus is a type of low cloud which
shading map
shoreface terrace
sill
soil erosion a) Stable environment, b) unstable environment.
spit Spurn Head, a coastal spit.
spring Rainwater enters through the fissures of the limestone
and the stream springs out where the limestone meets slate.
stack
Stevenson’s screen
stratosphere
may hang as mist over mountain tops.
striations The grooves and scratches left on bare
rock surfaces by the passage of a glacier.
strip cropping A method of soil conservation
whereby different crops are planted in a series of
strips, often following contours around a hillside.
The purpose of such a sequence of cultivation is
to arrest the downslope movement of soil. See soil
erosion.
subduction zone See plate tectonics.
subsistence agriculture A system of agriculture
in which farmers produce exclusively for their own
consumption, in contrast to commercial agriculture
where farmers produce purely for sale at the market.
subsoil See soil profile.
suburbs The outer, and largest, parts of a town or
city.
surface run-off That proportion of rainfall
received at the Earth’s surface which runs off
either as channel flow or overland flow. It is
distinguished from the rest of the rainfall, which
either percolates into the soil or evaporates back
into the atmosphere.
sustainable development The ability of a country
to maintain a level of economic development, thus
enabling the majority of the population to have a
reasonable standard of living.
swallow hole See pothole.
swash The rush of water up the beach as a wave
breaks. See also backwash and longshore drift.
syncline A trough in folded strata; the opposite of
anticline. See fold.
T
taiga The extensive coniferous forests of Siberia
and Canada, lying immediately south of the arctic
tundra.
talus See scree.
tarn The postglacial lake which often occupies a
corrie.
temperate climate A climate typical of mid-
latitudes. Such a climate is intermediate between
the extremes of hot (tropical) and cold (polar)
climates. Compare extreme climate. See also
maritime climate.
terminal moraine See moraine.
terracing A means of soil conservation and land
utilization whereby steep hillsides are engineered
into a series of flat ledges which can be used for
agriculture, held in places by stone banks to
prevent soil erosion.
tertiary sector That sector of the economy which
provides services such as transport, finance and
retailing, as opposed to the primary sector which
provides raw materials, the secondary sector which
processes and manufactures products, and the
quaternary sector which provides information and
expertise.
thermal power station An electricity-generating
plant which burns coal, oil or natural gas to
produce steam to drive turbines.
Third World A collective term for the poor nations
of Africa, Asia and Latin America, as opposed to the
‘fi rst world’ of capitalist, developed nations and the
‘second world’ of formerly communist, developed
nations. The terminology is far from satisfactory
as there are great social and political variations
within the ‘Third World’. Indeed, there are some
countries where such extreme poverty prevails
that these could be regarded as a fourth group.
Alternative terminology includes ‘developing
countries’, ‘economically developing countries’
and ‘less economically developed countries’
(LEDC). Newly industrialized countries are those
showing greatest economic development.
threshold See sill (sense 2).
tidal range The mean difference in water level
between high and low tides at a given location. See
tides.
tides The alternate rise and fall of the surface of
the sea, approximately twice a day, caused by the
gravitational pull of the moon and, to a lesser
extent, of the sun.
till See boulder clay.
tombolo A spit which extends to join an island to
the mainland.
topography The composition of the visible
landscape, comprising both physical features and
those made by people.
topsoil The uppermost layer of soil, more rich in
organic matter than the underlying subsoil. See
horizon, soil profi le.
tornado A violent storm with winds circling around
a small area of extremely low pressure. Characterized
by a dark funnel-shaped cloud. Winds associated
with tornadoes can reach speeds of over 300 mph
(480 km/h).
trade winds Winds which blow from the subtropical
belts of high pressure towards the equatorial belt
of low pressure. In the northern hemisphere, the
winds blow from the northeast and in the southern
hemisphere from the southeast.
transhumance The practice whereby herds of farm
animals are moved between regions of different
climates. Pastoral farmers (see pastoral farming)
take their herds from valley pastures in the winter
to mountain pastures in the summer. See also alp.
transnational corporation (TNC)
A company that has branches in many countries
of the world, and often controls the production of
the primary product and the sale of the finished
article.
tributary A stream or river which feeds into a larger
one. Compare distributary.
tropical rainforest The dense forest cover of the
equatorial regions, reaching its greatest extent in
the Amazon Basin of South America, the Congo
Basin of Africa, and in parts of South East Asia and
Indonesia. There has been much concern in recent
years about the rate at which the world’s rainforests
are being cut down and burnt. The burning of large
tracts of rainforest is thought to be contributing
to global warming. Many governments and
conservation bodies are now examining ways of
protecting the remaining rainforests, which are
unique ecosystems containing millions of plant
and animal species.
tropics The region of the Earth lying between the
tropics of Cancer (231–2°N) and Capricorn (231–2°S). See
latitude.
troposphere See atmosphere.
trough An area of low pressure, not sufficiently
well-defined to be regarded as a depression.
truncated spur A spur of land that previously
projected into a valley and has been completely or
partially cut off by a moving glacier.
tsunami A very large, and often destructive,
sea wave produced by a submarine earthquake.
Tsunamis tend to occur along the coasts of Japan
and parts of the Pacific Ocean, and can be the cause
of large numbers of deaths.
tuff Volcanic ash or dust which has been
consolidated into rock.
tundra The barren, often bare-rock plains of the
far north of North America and Eurasia where
subarctic conditions prevail and where, as a result,
vegetation is restricted to low-growing, hardy
shrubs and mosses and lichens.
typhoon See hurricane.
U
undernutrition A lack of a sufficient quantity of
food, as distinct from malnutrition which is a
consequence of an unbalanced diet.
urban decay The process of deterioration in the
infrastructure of parts of the city. It is the result of
terracing
tides Tidal ranges.
tombolo Chesil Beach, England.
a forest giant in the tropical rainforest
long-term shifts in patterns of economic activity,
residential location and infrastructure.
urban sprawl The growth in extent of an urban
area in response to improvements in transport
and rising incomes, both of which allow a greater
physical separation of home and work.
urbanization The process by which a national
population becomes predominantly urban through
a migration of people from the countryside to
cities, and a shift from agricultural to industrial
employment.
U-shaped valley A glaciated valley, characteristically
straight in plan and U-shaped in cross section. See
diagram. Compare V-shaped valley.
V
valley A long depression in the Earth’s surface,
usually containing a river, formed by erosion or by
movements in the Earth’s crust.
vector A quantity that has both magnitude and
direction.
vegetation The plant life of a particular region.
viscous lava Lava that resists the tendency to flow.
It is sticky, flows slowly and congeals rapidly. Non-
viscous lava is very fluid, fl ows quickly and congeals
slowly.
volcanic rock A category of igneous rock which
comprises those rocks formed from magma
which has reached the Earth’s surface. Basalt is an
example of a volcanic rock.
volcano A fissure in the Earth’s crust through
which magma reaches the Earth’s surface.
There are four main types of volcano:
(a) Acid lava cone – a very steep-sided cone
composed entirely of acidic, viscous lava which
flows slowly and congeals very quickly.
(b) Composite volcano – a single cone comprising
alternate layers of ash (or other pyroclasts) and lava.
(c) Fissure volcano – a volcano that erupts along
a linear fracture in the crust, rather than from a
single cone.
(d) Shield volcano – a volcano composed of very
basic, non-viscous lava which flows quickly and
congeals slowly, producing a very gently sloping
cone.
V-shaped valley A narrow, steep-sided valley made
by the rapid erosion of rock by streams and rivers.
It is V-shaped in cross-section. Compare U-shaped
valley.
vulcanicity A collective term for those processes
which involve the intrusion of magma into the
crust, or the extrusion of such molten material
onto the Earth’s surface.
W
wadi A dry watercourse in an arid region; occasional
rainstorms in the desert may cause a temporary
stream to appear in a wadi.
warm front See depression.
waterfall An irregularity in the long profile of a
river’s course, usually located in the upper course.
Compare rapids.
watershed The boundary, often a ridge
of high ground, between two river basins.
water table The level below which the ground is
permanently saturated. The water table is thus
the upper level of the groundwater. In areas where
permeable rock predominates, the water table may
be at some considerable depth.
wave-cut platform or abrasion platform A gently
sloping surface eroded by the sea along a coastline.
weather The day-to-day conditions of e.g. rainfall,
temperature and pressure, as experienced at a
particular location.
weather chart A map or chart of an area giving
details of weather experienced at a particular
time of day. Weather charts are sometimes called
synoptic charts, as they give a synopsis of the weather
at a particular time.
weather station A place where all elements of the
weather are measured and recorded. Each station
will have a Stevenson’s screen and a variety of
instruments such as a maximum and minimum
thermometer, a hygrometer, a rain gauge, a wind
vane and an anemometer.
weathering The breakdown of rocks in situ;
contrasted with erosion in that no large-scale
transport of the denuded material is involved.
wet and dry bulb thermometer
See hygrometer.
wind vane An instrument used to indicate wind
direction. It consists of a rotating arm which
always points in the direction from which the wind
blows.
Y
yardang Long, roughly parallel ridges of rock
in arid and semi-arid regions. The ridges are
undercut by wind erosion and the corridors
between them are swept clear of sand by the wind.
The ridges are oriented in the direction of the
prevailing wind.
yield The productivity of land as measured by the
weight or volume of produce per unit area.
Z
Zeugen Pedestal rocks in arid regions; wind erosion
is concentrated near the ground, where corrasion
by wind-borne sand is most active. This leads to
undercutting and the pedestal profile emerges.
U-shaped valley
volcano Composite volcano.
volcano Shield volcano.
waterfall
watershed
wave-cut platform a) Early in formation,
b) later in formation.
weather chart
Zeugen
wind vane