Alkonost -- bird of paradise, bird of grief and sorrow. She has wings, and woman's body and face. Alkonost's song makes a listener forget his worries.
Bania (banya) -- bathhouse
Bogi (Gods) -- sometimes used to refer to icons
Charodei -- sorcerer
Cvetnik -- book of magical charms
Dazhbog -- sun god, also god of blessings and son of Svarog
Dvoeverie (double faith) -- continuation of pagan beliefs and customs among the Russians long after their acceptance of Christianity
Finist (jasny sokol) -- origins are traced back to greek feniks, a legendary bird that rises from its own ashes.
Gamaiun (vesc'aja ptica) -- bird of paradise, also known as a wise bird. She has a woman's face and breasts. Her songs are a prophecy of future luck (good or bad).
Georgii (Svjatoj Georgij Pobedonosec) (St. George), also known as Egorii (Egor) or Iurii (Yurij) -- warrior saint (November 26 and April 23)
Gromovoi znak (thunder sign) -- a six-petaled rose inside a circle, associated with Rod
Gusli -- Russian folk instrument similar to a zither
Iarilo (Jarilo) -- minor god of male sexual potency, his effigy was destroyed at ritual funeral
Il'ia (Prorok) (Elijah the Prophet) -- corresponding to Perun (July 20)
Khorovod(y) -- circle dances, often around a decorated tree
Khors -- sun god
Koldun'ja -- female witch
Koldun -- male sorcerer
Koliada -- spirit of the winter solstice
Kudesnica -- female pagan priest or sorcerer
Kudesnik -- male pagan priest or sorcerer
Kupalo's Day (Ivana Kupala) (St. John the Baptist) -- celebration of the summer solstice (June 24)
Kupalo -- spirit of the summer solstice, associated with Kupalo's Day (June 24)
Lada -- variously thought to be the mother of Lel' and Polel', a god of the underworld and marriage
Lel' -- the son of Lada and brother of Polel'
Lelia -- the daughter of Lada
Lug -- meadow
Mat' syra zemlia (Moist Mother Earth) -- personification of the earth as a female deity
Mertvaja voda -- see dead water
Mokosh' (Saint Paraskeva-Friday) -- one and only female deity included among Vladimir's idols, associated with Moist Mother Earth, with fertility, bounty, moisture (October 28)
Molitva -- prayer
Nechistaia sila (unclean force) -- devil and lesser malevolent spirits
Oboroten' (changeling) -- magic persons who are able to transform themselves into animals
Paraskeva-Piatnitsa -- "woman's saint," associated with Mokosh' (October 28)
Perun -- chief of the pagan gods, god of thunder and lightning and of war, associated with July 20 (Elijah the Prophet)
Polel' -- the son of Lada and brother of Lel'
Porcha (spoiling) -- a disease caused by sorcerers and witches
Radunitsa -- originally a pagan holiday celebrating ancestors (the second week after Easter)
Rod -- god of birth, an early primary god of the east Slavs, a creator and god of fertility and light, associated with the winter solstice and July 20, replaced by Perun shortly before the tenth century
Rozhanitsy -- goddess of birth, associated with the harvest (September 9)
Rusalka -- Rusalka lives in lakes, rivers or springs.
Sirin (ptica sirin) -- bird of paradise with a human body. Her song makes a listener forget his worries and feel happiness.
Skazka -- folktale
Stribog -- god of wind, storm, and destruction
Svarog -- sun god, father of Dazhbog, divine smith
Svarozhichi -- sons of Svarog
Sviatovit -- god of the west Slavs, god of light, bounty, and divination regarding the harvest
Travnik -- book of magical charms
Upyr' -- vampire
Ved'ma -- female witch
Ved'miak -- male sorcerer
Vedun'ia -- female witch
Vedun -- male sorcerer
Vlas (St. Vlas) -- Christian counterpart to pagan Volos, patron of cattle (February 12)
Voda -- water
Vodjanoj -- Vodjanoj looks like an old man. Usually naked, with long hair and a beard. Vodjanoj lives in water and makes people drown
Volkhv -- pre-Christian male priest
Volos (Veles) -- god of cattle, commerce and the dead, associated with the winter solstice and spring equinox
Volshebnica -- female witch
Volshebnik -- male sorcerer
Vorozheia -- fortune-teller
Zagovor -- charm, an utterance with magical power
Zhivaja voda -- see live water 