

Abracadabra
Magic word used to help magician "make something happen". In reality, it is derived from ancient cabalistic symbols and at one time was believed to hold real power. The word may be derived from the Hebrew Ha-b'rakah, meaning "the blessing" or "the sacred name".

Ace
Either the playing card with a singular pip, or the side of a die with only one spot. From the Latin as, or unit.

Acetabularii
The magicians who specialized in performing the Cups and Balls trick in ancient Rome. From the Latin for "vinegar cup".

Aristocrat
Brand name of cards manufactured by U.S. Playing Card Co.

Aviator
Brand of cards manufactured by U.S. Playing Card Co. Design is symmetrical. Many gimmicked card decks are made with this back design.
Also known as Fox Lake.

BEE
Special back design of cards manufactured by U.S. Playing Card Co. Small scale pattern with no border makes this type of deck excellent for card sleights, as the pattern helps camouflage the moves.

Broken Wand Ceremony
Special ceremony conducted at the funeral of a magician in which a wand is broken to symbolize the loss of magical power. The first one was conducted by the Society of American Magicians at Houdini's memorial service in 1926.

Conjurer
Originally used to describe one who summons (or "conjures") demons and spirits, the first use of this term to describe the magician as entertainer was in 1785, in a French book titled The Conjurer Unmasked. "Conjuror" is an alternate spelling.

Cardician
Card magician and/or manipulator. Ed Marlo coined the term as the title of his 1953 book, The Cardician.

Fakir
A performer of seemingly miraculous feats (such as firewalking, snake charming and lying on a bed of nails), usually with some religious significance. This term is sometimes mistakenly used to describe a magician or conjurer; the proper Indian term for "magician" is really jadoo wallah.

"The Ghost Walks"
Theater slang for getting paid. Meant to sarcastically convey the rarity of the event, as in the familiar "When Hell freezes over" expression.

Hat Production
Not the production of hats, but rather the seemingly impossible production of many items from a single hat. Hartz's "Devil of a Hat" routine and Thurston's "All Out of a Hat" were spectacular productions. This effects lost its popularity when fashion changed and men no longer wore hats; today, the hat would seem to be a prop rather than an "ordinary object".

Hocus Pocus
Nonsense phrase used to help the magician "make something happen". Some feel that the word is a corruption of a Latin phrase used in the Mass, others say that it was the name of a magician. Still another source considers it a reference to the Norse folktale sorcerer Ochus Bochus. It could also be a meaningless phrase, created for its sound alone.

Juggler
Magicians were originally called "jugglers".

Legerdemain
French term (literally "light of hand") commonly used to refer to sleight of hand or magical manipulation.

Prestidigitation
Phrase coined by French magician Jules deRovere in 1815; loosely translated, the term means "performed with quick fingers".

Presto
Magic word taken from the musical term presto, for "quickly".

Profonde
The large pocket built into the tails of a long tuxedo coat that allows the magician to vanish items by tossing them down and behind him, into the pocket.

Servante
Pouch or shelf positioned on the magician's side of a table, hidden from the spectator's view, but allowing the magician to dispose of items by secretly dropping them into or onto the servante while the hands seem to always remain in full view above the table.

Sim Sala Bim
"Magic words" made popular by Dante; in fact, his show was named Sim Sala Bim. Actually, it was a magical phrase taken from a popular Danish fairy tale (Dante was from Denmark).

Stodare Egg
Proper name for the hollow egg used to vanish a silk. Used in the Silk To Egg effect.

Topit
Large pocket built into the lining of a jacket that allows the magician to vanish items by tossing them secretly and smoothly into the pocket.

Voila
French for "here it is".

kinesis comes from the Ancient Greek for “movement.” It was popularized in speculative fiction via the idea of telekinesis – moving objects with one’s mind – and can serve as a modern/scientific-sounding suffix in a magic system.

–mancy is a suffix from the Ancient Greek manteía, which refers specifically to divination. So, in folklore/history/anthropology a necromancer is not someone who makes zombies, but rather someone who summons the spirits of the dead to predict the future. A pyromancer is someone who uses fire in fortune-telling. And so on. But in fantasy, it has evolved into a generic suffix to denote any type of magic.

–urgy is what pedants like myself use in the place of –mancy. It comes from the Ancient Greek érgon, for “work,” so its meaning is much more general.

Alchemy is a protoscience that gained popularity in Europe through the Middle Ages and Renaissance. It is often described as a precursor chemistry, since alchemists were concerned with the transmutation of elements. Though, their actual theories were very different from modern chemistry, usually incorporating religious and mystical ideas. Alchemy was also practiced in the Muslim world, and similar traditions existed in India and China. The term comes from the Arabic prefix al- and the Ancient Greek khēmeía, which is also the source of "chemistry." While real-life alchemy was a complex and wide-reaching field, in fantasy settings, it is usually simplified to refer to the crafting of potions.

Arcane comes from the Latin for “hidden, secret.” The term has often been applied to mystical secrets—the word arcanum was used in alchemy, and aracana in tarot—so fantasy writers often use it as a generic adjective to mean “magical.”

The word cantrip appeared in Scotland in the 1700s, referring to a witch’s spell and/or to trickery in general. It tends to have mischievous and playful connotations.

The idea of casting a spell comes from the common definition of cast as “to cause to move or send forth by throwing.”

Charm descends from the Latin carmen for “song, incantation,” but came to be a generic term referring to any type of magic. As a noun, it commonly refers to a small object that protects its wearer from evil. As a verb, it commonly refers to refers to the act of using magic to exert control over a person.

The word conjure, from Latin, originally had to do with the taking of oaths. Its magical associations came when it was used to refer to binding demons to one’s will. In time, “conjurer” became a generic term for a magic-user. Today, it is usually associated with the idea of “conjuring” something from seeming nothingness.

Druids (from Old Celtic words for “oak” and “to know/see,” perhaps referring to divination using mistletoe) were a high-ranking political/religious class in some ancient Celtic cultures. They entered the modern popular consciousness via the Neo-Druidic movement, which often incorporates environmental beliefs. So, when druids show up in fantasy, they are usually depicted as nature-loving hippies who live in the woods. The Old English drȳ, referring to a magic-user, comes from the same roots.

Speaking of that language, dwimmer or dweomer is the Old English term for magic, especially as it relates to illusions, coming from the roots for “vapor, smoke, apparition.” There are many ways to render the word. Adding –craft gets dwimmercraft/dweomercraft. Adding –lock produces the alternate forms dwimmerlaik/demerlaik/dweomerlak. Sometimes in fantasy settings, "dweomer" specifically refers to a type of magical aura. Also, while we’re on the subject of Old English, I might as well give a shout-out to the dwolcræft as rarer term for magic, as well as lybb for a potion and galdor (related to the Norse galdr) for an incantation.

Enchantment descends from the Latin incantāre for singing or reciting spells. It can be used as a generic term for magic, but often has one of two meanings. The first, in the sense of enchanting a person, means to magically influence someone. The second, in the sense of enchanted items, means to imbue objects with magical properties.

Esoteric comes from the Ancient Greek esōterikós, “belonging to an inner circle.” It often refers to esoteric orders and beliefs systems like Gnosticism, Kabbalah, and Rosicrucianism, whose teachings are incomprehensible to the average person, but can supposedly be understood after years of study.

Hex came to the United States via the German hexen, for practicing witchcraft. This is related to the German for witch, Hexe, which is a cognate of the English word hag. A hex is usually a curse or malignant spell placed upon a person.

Incantation has the same roots as enchantment, but it carries more of the original meaning, referring to spells that are spoken aloud as part of a magic ritual.

Mana is a concept in Polynesian cultures. Its exact meaning is very nuanced, but it is often described as an energy or life force similar to the Chinese qi or Indian prana. In fantasy, it became a generic term for magical energy, especially in games where it can be represented by a mana bar that limits a character's spell-casting ability.

Magic originates from ancient Iranian maguš, whose exact origin is uncertain. But it entered Ancient Greek and Latin as a term for supernatural powers. It is, as you might have guessed, also where we get the words magician, magus, and mage. The form magick appeared in Early Modern English, where spelling rules were less consistent, and it was revived by twentieth-century occultist Aleister Crowley as a way to differentiate his beliefs from common stage magic. Some fantasy authors have followed his lead, but their magick usually have little in common with Crowley’s rituals.

Mystic comes from the Ancient Greek for “secret,” which is also where we get the English word mystery. Over the years, it has referred to a wide range of spiritual and religious ideas, and today it’s used as a catch-all for beliefs that are supernatural rather than scientific in origin. In fantasy, it is often a generic term for anything magical, much like “arcane.”

Occult, similarly, comes from the Latin for “secret, hidden.” The term “occult sciences” emerged in the Renaissance in reference to fields like alchemy and astrology that involved hidden forces. But as empirical methods became more advance, “occult” and “science” became antonyms. Often, it refers to esoteric societies that attempt magical rituals, or to “occult forces” in the sense of powerful spirits or demons.

Mid-twentieth-century parapsychologists and science fiction writers coined the term psionics from the Greek letter psi. This is meant to represent an unknown variable, and it is also the first letter in the Ancient Greek word for the mind, psyche. It generally refers to mental powers like telekinesis.

The word sorcerer comes from the Latin sors, or “fate,” and it originally referred to fortune-tellers. For most of its history, however, it has been a catch-all term for magic-users of any type.

We get the word spell from Germanic roots meaning “narrative, speech, sermon.” At some point, it began to refer to words which have magical power. In fantasy, it usually refers to any effect caused by a magic-user, whether it involves spoken words or not.

Thaumaturgy is Ancient Greek for “miracle work,” usually in reference to Christian saints. Fantasy authors sometimes use it as an alternative word for magic, often because it sounds more technical and scientific.

Theurgy, meanwhile, is Ancient Greek for “god work.” In Ancient Greece, it referred to rituals that called upon the gods. In certain forms of Renaissance mysticism, it evolved into a term for benevolent “white magic” that is in line with Christianity, in contrast with goety (from an Ancient Greek term for witchcraft) which referred to the summoning of demons.

Warlock comes from Old English for “traitor, liar, oath-breaker.” It was sometime used to refer to a person who was in league with the devil, and from there it evolved into a male equivalent of “witch.”

Witch comes from the Old English wicca/wicce, and it probably derives from Proto-Germanic roots referring to a soothsayer. Most people today regard the term as exclusively feminine, but for much of its history it was gender-neutral. In English, witchcraft has been used as a catch-all term for unholy and malevolent magic, but more recently, feminists, occultists, and fantasy writers have tried to reclaim it, so when witches appear in modern fiction, they are at least as likely to be as good as they are to be evil.

Wizard is a combination of the English “wise” and the suffix "–ard" (as in drunkard). While it originally just referred to a sagacious person, the line between science and the supernatural was blurred back in the day, so it soon became synonymous with magic. It is usually an exclusively masculine term, evoking a very specific image of a bearded old man with a staff and a pointy hat

Sorcery

Sorcery commonly refers to a malevolent form of magic in which evil spirits are conjured for supernatural influence. The practice involves spells and rituals to communicate with the dead or demonic to alter aspects of the natural world. It often falls under the umbrella of black magic.
Enchantment

Enchantment is generally a positive feeling that spurs from being under a spell (literally or figuratively). It’s an illusory experience of the senses that usually results in pleasurable feelings towards another person or object. While the word has many meanings, they all refer to a form of seduction. 
Charm

In the context of words related to magic, a charm is a physical object thought to contain a spell. They are worn, carried, or displayed to bring good luck and provide psychic protection. Examples of charms, sometimes known as talismans, include but are not limited to gemstones, essential oils, jewelry, coins, and statues.
Entertainment

The early 1800s saw the the introduction of stage “magicians”. These entertainers utilize the art of illusion to challenge the audience’s perception of reality. Common magic tricks include levitation, vanishing and re-appearing, deadly escape stunts, metamorphosis, sleight of hand, and displays of psychic intuition.
Black Magic

Black magic is a type of spell-casting often associated with evil. It is believed the practice invokes the devil to carry out harmful spells for selfish purposes such as revenge. Practices such as witchcraft, sorcery, and voodoo are often associated with black magic. Although not all see black magic as necessarily malicious, the connotation is generally negative. Some who suffer many misfortunes or fall mysteriously ill may believe they have been cursed by black magic. 
Wizard

A wizard is a scholar of the occult arts and highly skilled in practicing magic. Mentions of wizards date back to the biblical era and appear frequently in fairytales, fantasy literature, and games. Wizards are also sometimes referred to as sorcerers or magicians.
Magic Carpet

The origin of the magic carpet is not fully known but likely stemmed from Arabian and Persian folklore. It also appears in the Hebrew myth of King Solomon as a gift from God. Symbolically, magic carpets represent power and freedom from Earthly limitations, a common theme among words related to magic.
Spell

The word “spell” is arguably one of the most commonly used magic words. It is a magical formula that can take many forms, from an incantation, charm, elixir, and potion to an enchantment and bewitchery. Although often affiliated with witchcraft, any ritual performed with the intention to influence may also be viewed as spell-casting.
Incantation

An incantation is a verbal spell that is either spoken or sung. It can take many forms, from traditional witchcraft incantations to prayers, mantras, hymns, and chants. The purpose is to invoke the intercession of divine entities such as a God, Goddess, saint, spirit, or collective consciousness. 
Crystal Ball

Quartz crystal spheres are used for crystal-gazing, or scrying, as a medium for visions to come through to clairvoyants. Fortune-tellers frequently use them for insight into future events or spiritual guidance in making difficult life decisions.
Alchemy

Alchemy is the medieval precursor to the modern-day field of chemistry. It often focused on the transmutation of base metals into gold. But alchemy had other ambitious goals, such as curing diseases and achieving immortality and/or eternal youth.
List of Words Related to Magic

    Incantations 
    Hocus Pocus 
    Wand 
    Spell 
    Tarot 
    Foresight 
    Wizardly Powers 
    Supernatural 
    Transform 
    Magic Signs 
    Magic Number 
    Supernatural Magic 
    Magic Hat 
    Abracadabra
    Crystal Ball 
    Supernatural Qualities
    Black Art 
    Wizard Wands 
    Wizard 
    Conjuring
    Illusion
    Magician
    Alchemy
    Incantation
    Mystic
    Witch
    Charms
    Potion
    Ritual
    Mystical
    Fantasy
    Occult
    Clairvoyance
    Sorceress
    Charming
    Trick
    Supernatural
    Deception
    Conjuring trick
    Voodoo
    Mysticism
    Witchery
    Fairy
    Spellbound
    Physics
    Supernatural
    Mystique
    Fairytale
    Illusion 
    Black magic
    White magic
    Hocus-pocus 
    Vanish
    Carpet
    Potion 
    Oracle
    Mysterious
    Bewitchment
    Spellbinding
    Cursed
    Psychic
    Mystify
    Wizarding
    Enigmatic
    Warlock
    Rune
    Hex
    Hexcraft
    Incant 
    Act 
    Talisman 
    Coven
    Mystify
